--- Page 1 ---
iScience
Article
Electroactive polymer gels as probabilistic
reservoir automata for computation
Vincent Strong,
William
Holderbaum,
Yoshikatsu
Hayashi
y.hayashi@reading.ac.uk
Highlights
EAP gel memory
mechanics were
demonstrated via voltage
potential measurements
Probabilistic Moore
automata were
constructed from EAP gel
responses to stimulation
Through tuning response
encoding a computational
reservoir was created
The reservoir was shown
as more memory efﬁcient
than general digital
alternatives
Strong et al., iScience 25,
105558
December 22, 2022 Crown
Copyright ª 2022
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2022.105558
ll
OPEN ACCESS


--- Page 2 ---
iScience
Article
Electroactive polymer gels as probabilistic
reservoir automata for computation
Vincent Strong,1 William Holderbaum,1 and Yoshikatsu Hayashi1,2,*
SUMMARY
Electroactive Polymer (EAP) hydrogels are an active matter material used as ac-
tuators in soft robotics. Hydrogels exhibit active matter behavior through a
form of memory and can be used to embody memory systems such as automata.
This study exploited EAP responses, ﬁnding that EAP memory functions could be
utilized for automaton and reservoir computing frameworks. Under sequential
electrical stimulation, the mechanical responses of EAPs were represented in a
probabilistic Moore automaton framework and expanded through shaping the
reservoir’s energy landscape. The EAP automaton reservoir’s computational abil-
ity was compared with digital computation to assess EAPs as computational re-
sources. We found that the computation in the EAP’s reaction to stimuli can be
presented through automaton structures, revealing a potential bridge between
EAP’s use as an integrated actuator and controller, i.e., our automaton frame-
work could potentially lead to control systems wherein the computation was
embedded into the media dynamical responses.
INTRODUCTION
Computation spans many ﬁelds of study from algorithmic mathematics to hardware design and biological
simulation.1 In computational systems, the hardware and information processing dictate each other’s re-
quirements. Traditional computational systems separate the physical hardware and software side (imple-
mentation of algorithms) to allow for a diverse range of operations within the same architecture.2
However, some computational approaches combine the physical and algorithmic components to create a
system that is tailored to a speciﬁc task. For example, morphological computing explores this integration of
computing with the physical body, and proposes that control aspects can be outsourced to the body as the
functions are already ‘‘encoded’’ within.3 Through this encoding, morphological computing allows a sys-
tem to include the environment in its processes because the physical body is inﬂuenced by the environment
the process is in turn inﬂuenced. By outsourcing control to the body, the system becomes more open to
environmental effects in a way that can be supportive of the control instead of something to resist. This
embodiment of the environment in a control system is conceptualized in the idea of embodied cognition.
The idea of embodied cognition, originating in psychology, is that the body’s interactions with the envir-
onment constitute or contribute to cognition, meaning mental processes are not only computational
processes.4 An agent’s cognition or computation is strongly inﬂuenced by aspects of an agent’s body.5
Cognition arises from bodily interactions with the world and depends on the kinds of experiences that
come from having a particular body.6 For both concepts of morphological computing and embodied
cognition the bidirectional inﬂuence is exploitable. A stimulated body material acts as a computational
unit causing a change in the body and inﬂuencing actions on future stimulations. For example, a single ma-
terial can potentially contain both the cognition and actuation elements, but requires bodies with highly
complex dynamics to be computationally powerful.7,8 Self-oscillating hydrogels have been explored as a
form of self-regulating repeating actuator9 combining control and actuation in a single body. However,
these actuators had little to no external control and could not react to changes in the environment. Through
morphological and embodied theories, changing environments can be reﬂected in a body’s behavior.
Research has been carried out that utilizes the inherent properties of a soft arm in its control.10 In this
example, the compliance of the arm was used as a component for its own control. The way in which the
arm deformed in reaction to actuation was used to alter further actuations, creating a feedback loop where
the soft-body’s response dictated future behavior. There have been many other explorations into
combining morphological concepts with robotics including those inspired by plant root behavior. In this
1Department of Biomedical
Sciences and Biomedical
Engineering, School of
Biological Sciences,
University of Reading,
Reading, Berkshire RG67BE,
UK
2Lead contact
*Correspondence:
y.hayashi@reading.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2022.105558
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022 Crown Copyright ª 2022
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS


--- Page 3 ---
example, a compliant body allows a robot to ﬁnd the most efﬁcient route through soil without external con-
trol.11,12 A form of universal gripper was developed that used a compliant bag that conformed to a surface
shape then applied pressure to grip. This technology allowed complex shapes to be grasped without the
need to calculate gripping trajectories as all ’calculations’ were done by the compliance of the surface.13
Each of these examples uses inherent properties of the physical body to stand in for control that would nor-
mally be handled externally. So, by exploring materials that contain highly complex dynamics, is it possible
to combine both computation and actuation in a single medium allowing for the actuator to, in part, control
itself.
To investigate this question a single medium with highly complex dynamics is needed, one that demon-
strates the control concepts of morphological computing and embodied cognition in its reaction to stimuli.
Active matter is a ﬁeld of study into materials that present such behaviors. Active matter materials are
composed of many active agents which consume energy to drive mechanical forces. There are many forms
of active matter from active ﬂuids or soft robotics.14 Importantly these active agents, although indepen-
dent, inﬂuence each other leading to a form of parallel computation, a feature that has been exploited
in some chemical processor systems utilizing Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) reactions.15,16
However, most computational systems require memory to process functions. Finite automata use the mem-
ory of their current state to perform computations, morphological computation media are no different. In
such morphological active matter systems, functions of memory are manifested through the distribution of
active agents and their interactions with each other.17,18 Although individually the agents are simple and
memory-less, together they can embody a response to stimuli. Stimulation changes the active agent’s
contribution to the system by changing local concentrations, velocities, and other properties. When given
additional stimuli these collective properties, among the many active agents, alter the response. Each
consecutive response to stimuli is inﬂuenced by previous responses.
The way in which active matter manifests memory in this fashion has also been employed in chemical
systems and exploited to perform computation as automata.19 Another physical chemistry system that
displays a memory function is active hydrogels.20 In active hydrogels, free ﬂoating ions act as the active
agents. Through the application of electric ﬁelds, the ions can be inﬂuenced to move causing changes
in the polymer structure.21 A hysteresis is induced by changes in the polymer structure and causes subse-
quent stimulations to generate less actuation.22 This hysteresis means, as with other active matter systems,
previous responses to stimuli affect future responses leading to a memory function.
These morphological active matter examples present memory-based behavior in their actuation. However, to
investigate if it is possible to combine actuation and control, a computational structure is needed that these
behaviors can be exploited through. The most common memory based computational structure is that of the
automata, indeed automata exist throughout nature morphologically and nature initially inspired their
design.23 Automata are a computational structure that process information in sequence according to a set
of programmed rules.24 Information in and out of the automaton must follow a language deﬁnition, comprised
of a set of deﬁned symbols (or words) with deﬁned grammar to form a sequence (or sentence). The language
dictates what the automaton accepts as input and what the automaton gives as output. Output can use an
entirely separate language to the input and be as simple as acceptance or rejection of certain inputs.
The simplest automaton structures are deterministic, however active matter systems in practice are non-
deterministic as each input can lead to several outcomes. However, even highly dynamic systems can be
simpliﬁed to sets of rules given a large enough rule set.25 Probabilistic automata are a generalization of
non-deterministic ﬁnite automaton that traverse states based on weighted state transitions.26,27 Because
of their generalization, probabilistic automata can be applied to a signiﬁcant number of applications
and are often used in statistical modeling.28 The probabilistic automaton structure allows large complex
systems to be simpliﬁed into state machines, where probability distributions are converted to weighted
state transitions.29 These automata ﬁt real world behavior of complex bodies such as active matter systems
but do not traditionally take inputs. Without the ability to take inputs a system cannot be used computa-
tionally. However, Moore Machine automata are a type of ﬁnite-state transducer (FST) automata30 that
traverse states based on sequential inputs, giving an output at each state. Through the combination of
behavioral features in these automata frameworks, active matter and other such morphological systems
could be represented in a computational context as a probabilistic Moore automaton.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 4 ---
The probabilistic Moore automaton structure, when applied to the EAP hydrogel, offers many advantages
over the more conventional computational structures such as Moore machine. Moore machine automaton
are most often used to model computer programs and computational logic,31 this means that by using
them as a foundation any framework generated already has a strong base in computational logic allowing
for easier implementation within applications. However, without the probabilistic element the full behavior
of the EAP hydrogel is restricted to deterministic approximations, this obstructs an entire region of
complexity that could be utilized for computation. Probabilistic computing, or stochastic computing,
has been a ﬁeld of interest since the 1960s, allowing for more efﬁcient computation with high error toler-
ance32 and allowing for broader ranges of computations.33 Using the conventional computing techniques
of Moore machine automata as a base gives a head start in framework development through the wealth of
knowledge in the ﬁeld of automata computing. In addition, this allows the ﬁnal framework to be more easily
applied to problems currently being approached via automaton based solutions. Building the probabilistic
elements on top of the Moore machine automata allows for faster implementation, while also allowing the
full computational potential of the medium to be exploited. Probabilistic elements can provide a broader
computational landscape, when compared to more convectional computational structures. Although these
automaton frameworks provide a ﬂexible and robust computation scheme, the true potential lies in exploit-
ing the inherent parallel processing of active matter.19 Neural networks are an inherently parallel compu-
tational construct but are typically implemented in software or specially designed hardware; reservoir
computing expands this implementation dependency.
Reservoir computing is inspired by Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) frameworks where the dynamics of a ﬁxed
non-linear system, called a reservoir, is used as part of a neural network to map input and output signals to
higher dimensional space.34 The reservoir feeds into a layer of neurons known as the output layer. The weights
of these output neurons are tuned to achieve learning in the system much like in standard RNNs. The reservoir
can be any kind of medium that can encode temporal problems into higher dimensions to generate recurrent
connections between data.35 For example, water ripples in a bucket have been used as a reservoir to encode
image data for pattern recognition.36 In addition, a length of optical ﬁber has been used to introduce a time
delay and gain in feedback to create a reservoir for use in speech recognition.37
As with morphological computing, the key use of reservoir computing systems is to exploit alternative
computation media to solve problems that would otherwise be inefﬁcient for traditionalcomputing.35 In
automaton theory the automaton is designed to accomplish a speciﬁc task through the deﬁnition of its lan-
guage.24 Automaton structures are limited by the language that they use. However, using reservoir
computing as an additional layer that alters the automaton language to suit a given task could expand
the capabilities of the system. Given the morphological nature of reservoir computing, can reservoir
computing be combined with probabilistic Moore automata to supplement short comings and allow the
full free energy landscape of the active matter systems, such as EAP hydrogels, to be utilized. The use of
EAP hydrogels in this way is currently unexplored; however, similar exploitations of material morphological
computing have been shown with great potential. EAPs unique properties have already been extensively
explored as building materials in many biologically inspired robotics,38utilizing EAPs morphological be-
haviors in the production of biomimetic soft body robots from worm-like39 to jellyﬁsh40 designs and all
manner of micro robotics.41
Recently, the computational abilities of pneumatic and compliant soft robotic media have been exploited
to aid in their own control,42,43 and then expanded through the use of EAPs to improve this ‘‘self-control’’ by
constructing physical reservoirs.44 The computational advantages of EAPs have been further exploited in
applications such as biomedicine and e-textiles,45 where in the latter the ability for EAPs to act as both actu-
ator and sensor are combined with morphological computation to allow for unique integration with
clothing. Ionic EAPs have been explored as stress sensors utilizing their inherent morphological nature
to allow for more versatile and sensitive detection.46 EAP hydrogels exist as a type of ionic EAP and exhibit
behaviors found in the majority of these technologies such as actuation, sensing, compliance, and compu-
tation. However, EAP hydrogels have yet to be fully explored for these applications because of the lack of
existing frameworks to support them. The applications mentioned above (biomimetics, micro robotics,
e-textiles, and biomedicine) would serve as fruitful applications for EAP hydrogel computation technology.
In summary, computation is not only limited to the most common implementations, a vast ﬁeld of morpho-
logical and embodied computing theories allow computation to be realized in a great number of unlikely
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
3
iScience
Article


--- Page 5 ---
places. Active matter systems are one area of these new media that present computational capability
through morphological theories. EAP hydrogels are an active matter system showing much potential in
this computational application. Utilizing the ubiquitous computational frameworks of automaton, the
computation of active matter systems can be exploited as shown in chemical examples.19 With more appro-
priate automaton frameworks, such as probabilistic Moore automaton, can other active matter systems,
such as EAP hydrogels, be exploited for computation beyond the currently explored EAPtechnologies.
Furthermore, utilizing additional morphological computing structures such as reservoir computing, it is
possible to further utilize the potential of such an active matter medium.
This study aims to be a pioneering work into applying the unique mechanics within EAP hydrogels by devel-
oping and validating an automaton reservoir framework, designed to harness the EAP gels responses to an
electric ﬁeld. First, using the mechanical responses of the ionic EAP hydrogel under an electric ﬁeld, we
studied the memory mechanics present within its behavior. Second, we applied this memory to develop
a probabilistic Moore machine automata structure and evaluated this structure against the hydrogel’s re-
sponses to stimuli. This allowed us to analyze the hydrogel’s computational potential as an automata.
Third, we expand the automata framework through reservoir computing and thresholding to construct a
hybrid automaton-reservoir system capable of beneﬁcial computation.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Memory mechanics through ion migration
Polyacrylamide hydrogel is an ionic, active matter, EAP that has been shown to exhibit large shape
changes.21 As an ionic EAP, the volume changes are induced through ion migration, followed by osmotic
pressure driven water ﬂow. Hydrogen ions act as active agents within the hydrogel, interacting with the
polymer networks. Polyacrylamide is a relatively simple EAP hydrogel to synthesise,47 allowing for it to
be produced in large batches and moulded in many different ways for the required experiment. After poly-
merization, these hydrogels are inert48 making them easy to handle. Most importantly the electric ﬁeld
stimulation only requires small voltages to operate, being stimulated by tens of volts depending on
size21 whereas many alliterative EAP materials such as dielectric elastomers require in excess of a thousand
volts.49
With stimulation by an electric ﬁeld, the ions migrate50 as a result of the combined electric ﬁeld21 and ion
chemical potential.51 As the ions move, they drag water molecules causing changes in water distribution.
As the ions accumulate on one side, the gel swells and deforms. Swelling is driven by equilibrium between
osmotic pressure52 and rubber elasticity53 in the polymer network. Temperature and water content within
the hydrogel can affect this equilibrium.21 Temperature alters the elastic properties and rate of ionic mo-
tion.47 As the osmotic pressure difference between the polymer networks and ionic solution drives the
swelling, changes in the hydrogel’s water content change the degree to which it can swell, as well as
altering the mechanical properties of the material.54 Because of this, the temperature and water concen-
tration must be controlled; this is detailed in the STAR method section.
Ions entering a location cause an increase in osmotic pressure which, in turn, causes water molecules to
enter the location and drive swelling. As a location swells, larger volume changes are required to increase
the width by the same amount, meaning larger osmotic pressures and larger quantities of ions. Given a
constant migration rate of ions into a local polymer network, the localized rate of swelling gradually de-
creases creating a hysteresis effect.22 Because of this hysteresis effect if a series of stimulations were
applied, of consistent length and strength, each consecutive stimulation would cause less localized
swelling in the gel than the previous. Because each consecutive stimulation causes less and less volume
change, each deformation has inﬂuence on further deformations.
Although the gel takes little time to swell with stimulation it takes considerably longer to deswell without
stimulation, this is demonstrated in the Figure S1. The difference in time scales allows previous stimulations
to affect future stimulation-deformation cycles. Thus, the hysteresis effect is driven by the slow diffusion of
counterions in and out of the local polymer networks, this in turn leads to a memory function in the hydro-
gel’s behavior.55 This memory function can be demonstrated by recording the collection of ions via the
voltage potential across the gel as electric stimulations are applied, the procedure for which is discussed
in the STAR Methods section.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 6 ---
Voltage potential is directly proportional to the distribution of ions, a concentration of charged ions at one
electrode creates a potential much like an ion battery,56 demonstrated in Figure 1 section d. Figure 2 shows
a sequence of positive and negative stimulation of (1,1,1,-1) where 1 represents the electric stimulation
of +31 V, and 1 the stimulation of 31 V.
For each stimulation, the electric potential (voltage) was recorded against time. The electric potential was
measured using the same electrode pairs which applied the electric stimulation (Figure 2). Another stimu-
lation sequence can be found in the Figure S2 (representing a stimulation sequence of 1,-1,-1,1).
In Figure 2 pictures of the gel’s responses at the different time-steps were labeled from 0 to 4. Gel behavior
is described corresponding to the following time steps below:
0. At t = 0s in Figure 2, gel has yet to be stimulated and was at default position.
1. At t = 10 S in Figure 2, positive stimulation (31v) was applied for 90s placing anode on right until t =
100 S. Positively charged ions were drawn to negative electrode (right) pulling water molecules with
them causing swelling and the gel to bend to the left. There was an immediate rise in voltage poten-
tial provided by electric ﬁeld, as ions gather on right the voltage potential increases further.
2. At t = 110 S in Figure 2, negative stimulation (31 V) was applied for 90 S placing anode on left until t =
200 S. There was an immediate drop of voltage potential shown in the ﬁgure at t = 110 S caused by
Figure 1. Illustration of experimental EAP hydrogel motion in reaction to electric stimulation as driven by ion
migration
(A) EAP gel suspended within the solution; gel is highlighted by yellow outline. 3D printed apparatus holds the gel on
electrodes at set height within the solution, yellow wires provide power to electrodes for stimulation.
(B) Diagram showing the symbol representation of stimulation polarity, 1 is +31 V and 1 is 31 V.
(C) Diagram showing how gel bending angle is measured against base of suspension apparatus and gel’s mid-point at tip.
(D) Diagram showing how inhomogeneous distribution of ions causes change in the voltage potential between gel’s
surfaces.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
5
iScience
Article


--- Page 7 ---
application of the electric ﬁeld. Ions were currently toward right, so voltage potential starts higher
(closer to 0 as shown on graph). Ions were pulled to left electrode causing voltage potential to
decrease as they gather causing swelling on the left and bending the gel toward the right.
3. At t = 210 S in Figure 2, positive stimulation (31 V) was applied for 90 S placing anode on right until t =
300 S. Ions continued to move toward left electrode causing further swelling on left, further bending
the gel to the right. The hysteresis effect can be seen in this change in voltage potential. The voltage
potential ﬁrst plateaus, then starts rising toward 0, as the minimum limit of voltage potential reduces.
The limits of the voltage potential (directly related to the swelling amount via ion migration) reduce
over continuous stimulation by the hysteresis effect.
4. At t = 310 S in Figure 2, positive stimulation (31 V) was applied for 90 S placing anode on right until t =
400 S. Ions moved back toward right electrode causing swelling and the gel to bend slightly left, but
less, because of the hysteresis effect caused by the change in ion distribution as a result of swelling.
Voltage potential raised as ions gather but because of the hysteresis, the level of the potential was
less than that achieved by the initial stimulation (shown by the dashed green line).
The results of Figure 2, described above, show how the electric ﬁeld induced swelling is subject to the hys-
teresis through the reduction of the maximum and minimum voltage potentials as a function of consecutive
stimulations. The voltage potential necessary to induce the same angle of bending was altered with each
stimulation as a function of time, inﬂuenced by previous simulations leading to a response tantamount to
memory. The inﬂuence of sequential swelling can be seen in Figure 3 section A. The same actions can be
seen occurring in the Figure S2 (representing an input sequence of 1,-1,-1,1) where the hysteresis moves
the voltage potential toward 0 over sequential stimulations (represented by the green dashed line). Now
that the memory function has been established through the dynamical responses of the gel, a suitable
framework is required to utilize the memory for computation.
Applying EAP gel to a probabilistic Moore machine automata
One of the most common memory based computational frameworks is the automata. The previous section
shows how EAP gels exhibit memory. As a next step, we map electric stimulation and mechanical responses
of the gel onto the automata framework to examine the computational ability of the hydrogels. Electric
stimulation is considered as the input to the automata system, and the bending angle as the system output.
Using this input-output relation, we apply the memory function, attributable to the dynamical responses of
the gels, as an automata. Further, in this context, the gel acts as an interpreter, converting one language to
another.57 As an interpreter the gel converts input stimulations to output postures through the memory
function. The memory function of the gel acts as a set of deﬁned instructions. This framework also follows
the structure of a transducer automaton.58 Because of the highly dynamic nature of the EAP gels, their re-
sponses to the electric stimulation have variation in terms of bending angles. A probabilistic automata was
Figure 2. Voltage potential across gel over time
Key frames from recorded video illustrate bending at t = 0, t = 100, t = 200, t = 300 and t = 400 (seconds) and labeled 0,1,2,3,4 respectively. A green dashed
line is used to compare the voltage potential at end of a stimulation with that at beginning. The sequence applied in the experiment show is 1,1,1,-1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 8 ---
used to take account of this variation in behavior and provide an additional dimension in behavior. In
probabilistic automata each state transition has a probability of occurring, this means that two identical
probabilistic automata would have variations in outputs26,27 mimicking variations between gel instances.
We consider that this form of automata can be mapped onto the EAP gel behavior, because the output
angles are not purely determined by the input stimulation but also determined by probability as a result
of the highly complex dynamics of the hydrogels in an ionic solution.
Automata utilize symbolic representations of inputs and outputs. For example, the output series can repre-
sent words in the sentences that are translated by the automata. In automata the input and output senten-
ces can utilize different grammar rules and thus represent different languages,24,59 this is also the case for
the hydrogel. The inputs and outputs of the hydrogel require different encoding rules as they represent
different energy forms, electrical stimulation and mechanical motion, different encoding rules mean
different grammar rules and so different languages.
To fully utilize the gel in an automata framework, we ﬁrst deﬁne these languages in the input and output
series of the EAP gels. The gel’s behavior must be broken down into ﬁnite states by applying discrete
time intervals, deﬁning characters, words, and sentence within the context of gel’s response to a series
of electric stimuli as follows; input to the system is voltage applied to the gel as electric stimulation. In
this study we used three input states with set magnitude; negative (31v), neutral (0v), and positive
(+31v) simpliﬁed into the symbol set of  1; 0; 1 respectively. The state of the system is deﬁned as the
bending angle of the gel under the electric ﬁeld, and can be mapped, through thresholds, to an output
symbol. A demonstration of this mapping is shown in Figure 3 section B, output symbols were set by
applying zones over the full movement range. Deﬁning more zones to categorize the bending angles cre-
ates an output language with more output symbols, giving higher resolution. However, this higher resolu-
tion is at the cost of accuracy because of the probabilistic nature of the hydrogel as an automaton. These
thresholds act to deﬁne the output symbols, converting an analogue input-output system to a discreet rep-
resentation adapted to an automaton framework. The thresholding algorithm was used to generate the
grammatical structure of the output symbol series. For this study, three thresholding zones were used:
left, center, right as  1; 0; 1 respectively to generate the output symbols as shown in Figure 3 section B
in the right diagram.
To utilize these automaton languages a suitable automaton framework is required that is probabilistic and
takes inputs for state transitions. Moore machine automata are a restricted type of ﬁnite-state transducer,
whose output are determined only by its current state.30 This behavior closely matches the EAP gel’s
Figure 3. Illustrated affect of compound swelling and encoding of resultant bending angle through threshold
application
(A) Diagrams demonstrating the experimental set-up and effect of compound antagonistic swelling; (1) Experimental set-
up with the placement of electrodes on gel, (2) Bending of the gel upon application of electric ﬁeld, (3) Equalized bending
upon electric ﬁelds application in the opposite direction, (4) Further bending by continuing application of electric ﬁeld.
(B) Application of the thresholds to determine the output series; (left) Acceptance or rejection with one threshold, (right)
Symbolic encoding with two thresholds.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
7
iScience
Article


--- Page 9 ---
automaton behavior, given the constructed language deﬁnitions. Moore machine automata are, however,
deterministic for a given initial state and input pair, a deterministic ﬁnite automaton (DFA) has exactly one
next state.
The dynamical responses of the EAP gels are non-deterministic or probabilistic; however, a probability
component can be introduced to the Moore machine deﬁnition to create a Probabilistic Moore Automata
(PMA). The PMA can be deﬁned using an adapted Moore machine deﬁnition that includes a probability
component P mapping probabilities to the transition function. This is shown in Equation 1 as a 7-tuple
system.
A = ðQ; S; G; d; P; u; i; Þ Where:
States Q = fS01; S11; S12; .; SNIg; I = 2N
where Si;j ˛ Q for
fi ˛ Z j 0 % i % Ng and fj ˛ Z j 1 % j % Ig;
and N is the sentence length N ˛ ZR 0
Input alphabet S = f 1; 0; 1g
Output alphabet G = f 1; 0; 1g
Transition function d : Q 3 S/Q
Transition probabilities P : d/R +
Output function u : S/G
Initial state i = S0;1
(1)
For every symbol in the input sentence, the active matter moves to the appropriate state based on the
probability of the transition, and gives the output associated with that state. The output function u deﬁnes
the encoding that maps from state to output via thresholding, translating gel bending angle to output
symbol.
To evaluate the application of the probabilistic automaton on the EAP hydrogel, the gel is stimulated using
the deﬁned input sentence, and the responses compiled, details on the experiment are found in the STAR
Methods section. In this experiment N was set to be 3, as stimulation beyond that point led to no signiﬁ-
cantly measurable response from the EAP gel. Thus, the input and output sequences were deﬁned as the 3
element vectors fIðlÞ : IðlÞ = ðI1; I2; I3Þ; Ii ˛ Sg and fOðkÞ : OðkÞ = ðO1; O2; O3Þ; Oi ˛ Gg respectively, where
i is the ith symbol in the vector. l&k are labels for the input and output state respectively as a result of the
sequence vector, given by Equations 2 and 3.
In Equation 2, l is the integer labeling the state of the input vector I and Ii is the ith symbol in I, for example,
Ið5Þ = ½1;  1; 1 and Ið2Þ = ½  1; 1;  1. In Equation 3, k is the integer labeling the state of the output vec-
tor O and Oi is the ith symbol in O, for example Oð5Þ = ½ 1; 1; 0 and Oð21Þ = ½1; 0; 1. The experiments
seek to create a generalized framework to overcome inconsistencies between gels, and so, each series of 8
input permutations is repeated with a different batch of gels.
l =
X
N
i = 1
2i  1ðIi + 1Þ

2
(Equation 2)
k =
X
N
i = 1
3i  1ðOi + 1Þ
(Equation 3)
Each series of 8 different input sequences creates its own state tree of gel postures which are compared
with each other to evaluate consistency and repeatability. One such state tree is shown in Figure 4 and de-
picts the change in gel posture with different input sequences as a directed automata graph.
To effectively judge consistency of the dynamical responses between gel samples, some post-processing
is needed to ﬁlter noise from unavoidable inconsistencies between experiments e.g. positioning of gel,
gel surface texture, slight synthesis differences between batches etc. The procedure is designed to mini-
mize inconsistencies. To ﬁlter noise in the current setup, a gain a and offset q0 parameter are used to
reduce the effect of differences in surface texture that cause initial bending in the gel at t = 0.60 The
use of these parameters also reduces the effect of differences in synthesis between batches because
of differences in chemical ratio changing in elasticity,61 respectively. The speciﬁc use of this ﬁltering
can be found in the supplementary information in Methods S100Post-Processing Experimental Results
to Reduce Variance’’, the reduction in variance via the post-processing can be seen in the supplementary
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 10 ---
information in Table S1. From this ﬁltering the variance62 in output angles for each input sequence was
reduced. Thresholds are used to categorize the continuous output into a symbol list to be used in an
automaton context, as represented by the output function u in equation set 1 and deﬁned by Equation 4,
where O is the output symbol, Q is the post-processed output angle, t1 and t2 are thresholds 1 and 2
respectively. A smaller symbol list allows for reduced variance, but also, reduces computational ability
as fewer symbols can be used to represent computed results. Likewise larger symbol lists allow for
more complex computation but are more sensitive to gel composition.63 There needs to be a balance
between computation and predictability.
O = uðQ; t1; t2Þ =
8
<
:
 1
Q < t1
0
t1 % Q % t2
1
Q > t2
9
=
;
(4)
To apply the collected data to the probabilistic automaton structure, t1 and t2 must be set in Equation 4.
Selection of output thresholds alter the response of the gel as an automaton. To assess the automata’s abil-
ity under different values of t1and t2, the following criteria was used for optimization:
 Maximize predictability: Achieved by maximizing the probability that each I vector will consistently
result in the same O vector between activations of the probabilistic Moore machine.
 Maximize computational range: Achieved by realising equal distribution of output symbols in the O
vectors generated by the probabilistic Moore machine.
 Maximize computational versatility: Achieved by maximizing the number of unique O vectors given by
the probabilistic Moore machine across all I vectors.
Through the optimization of these criteria the thresholds were found to be 7.8 and 2.7 for threshold 1 and
2, respectively. A more detailed deﬁnition of the optimization function approach and results can be found
in the supplementary information in Methods S2 00Optimization of Output Encoding Thresholds to Maxi-
mize Automaton Response’’, the results of the optimization of these criteria can be seen in the Figure S3.
From these thresholds a bias can be observed toward one direction as the negative threshold is much
larger than the positive. This is likely because of the orientation of the gel in the molding process, the bot-
tom has contact with the mold surface whereas the top is open leading to a difference in surface texture.
However, as all gels are made consistently this shouldn’t affect the validity of the results.
Figure 4. Automata directed graph for a 3-symbol system (N = 3). 8 gels were run to explore each sequence and
branch of the directed graph
At each stage of the sequence the gels are shown side by side in the same order for each layer. Each Si;j node represents a
state of the machine where i denotes the layer (or symbol in the case of the input/output sequence) and j denotes the path
that led to that state for that layer, with S0;1 as the initial state, also deﬁned in Equation 1. Each node has 3 input paths; 1
and 1 lead to subsequent states, 0 representing no input leads back to the same state.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
9
iScience
Article


--- Page 11 ---
The optimized thresholds were used to generate a transition tree from the experimental data and generate
the probability transitions as shown in Figure 5. The probabilistic directed graph is of Figure 5, showing the
probability that each transition path will be taken given a certain input symbol and the function of the hy-
drogel as a non-deterministic automata. This resultant probabilistic automaton shows a promising
complexity in the automata’s output response and rule structure, with threshold selection able to tune
the ability of the automaton.
When designing automata, the complexity of the program (rule set) is limited by the range of possible re-
sponses. With a probabilistic state system, the possible responses are far more versatile. There is, however,
a trade-off, the automaton has a much wider range of computational capacity (able to output more com-
plex sequences) at the cost of accuracy giving less determinable results. This means that the use of such a
computational resource needs to be ﬁt for purpose regarding application and computational ability. In the
next section, to broaden the computational ability, we expand the framework to better embody the mech-
anisms of the gel as a computational reservoir.
Probabilistic Moore automata as a computational reservoir
The PMA is rich in dynamics, allowing information storage through memory of the EAP hydrogel. Each state
of the directed tree acts as a non-linear node encompassing the behavior of the non-linear units (active
ions) as shown in Figure 5. This network of nodes behaves similarly to a neural network and, more specif-
ically a reservoir. Reservoir Computing is a framework that maps input signals into higher dimensional
computational spaces through the dynamics of a ﬁxed, non-linear system called a reservoir.34 Reservoir
computing is a derivation of recurrent neural networks and as such implements the ability to learn. In reser-
voir computing learning takes place through the optimization of output encoding.35 The encoding func-
tions are altered until the result best embodies the function desired for the intended application.
Reservoir computers allows for highly dynamic analog systems to be used in computation, allowing them to
perform computations that would otherwise be slower or less accurate on digital computers.35 These com-
puters are, however, less versatile than current digital systems as the selection of a reservoir is dependent
on the intended application. For example, the ripples in a vibrating water source have been used to encode
image data more efﬁciently than conventional digital computers.36 A reservoir computing layout consists of
Figure 5. The directed graph of the probabilistic automaton
Using thresholds 7.8 & 2.7 for thresholds 1 ðt1Þ& 2 ðt2Þ respectively (as found through threshold optimization detailed in
the supplemental information Methods S2 00Optimization of Output Encoding Thresholds to Maximize Automaton
Response’’ and Figure S3). The starting state that the gel inhabits is labeled ’’Start’’, each following node depicts a
possible state which is labeled in red with the following format (Input, the input symbol that lead to this state from the
previous state): (Output, the output symbol given from entering this state): (Probability, the probability that this state
would be entered given the input symbol).
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 12 ---
3 main components; excitation layer, reservoir, and readout layer,34 these components are described in
Table 1.
A reservoir in this context must be made up of individual, non-linear units, and capable of storing informa-
tion64 much like the PMA has already presented. In the ﬁeld of physical computing, reservoirs produce mul-
tiple outputs to provide a rich non-linear in interaction with the surrounding environment. For example,
down the length of an octopus arm10,65 or the location of ripples in a vibrating water source.36,66
In contrast, in the current implementation of the EAP hydrogel framework, there is only one physical output via
the bending angle of a single EAP gel. However, through using the PMA, additional outputs are given over tem-
poral space. Each symbol of the output sequence of the PMA constructed in the previous section represents an
instance in the EAP hydrogels motion. Thus, using the temporal responses of the hydrogels, we can utilize mul-
tiple outputs over the duration of the motion path. Figure 5 shows this temporal sampling as each layer of the
tree represents a different step of time in the automaton’s operation. Figure 5 also shows each path has an asso-
ciated transition probability that increases the dimensionality of the automaton. This means the relatively simple
EAP system can be used as a reservoir via the generated PMA, providing the required multiple outputs via tem-
poral sampling and higher dimensions via the probability element. The similarities between the PMA and reser-
voir computing frameworks allow for techniques of reservoir computing to be used to expand the computational
ability of the PMA by using it as a reservoir. To apply this reservoir framework to the EAP gel based PMA, the
reservoir computing components must be deﬁned in terms of the EAP gel system, these comparisons are shown
in Table 1.
The main concept of reservoir computing is to utilize the non-linear behavior of a physical system to do
computations that would require an approximated mathematical model to calculate35 via conventional
purely digital/binary computation systems, such as microcontrollers or personal computers. For the
PMA to have value as a reservoir, its behavior must embody computations that would otherwise be less
effective when modeled via conventional digital computational means. The mechanics of the EAP hydro-
gels showed continuous probabilistic responses upon electrical stimulation, which were discretized to ﬁt
the automaton framework. Although most examples of reservoirs in morphological computing are phys-
ical, like the gel, they can also be represented virtually.64 Virtual reservoirs can take the form of modeled
systems, such as artiﬁcial neural networks, or as a database of responses from physical reservoirs. The dis-
cretized probabilistic automata transitions from the previous section, as shown in Figure 5, have potential
as a virtual database reservoir that can be used to validate the EAP hydrogel PMA as a reservoir computer.
The use of a virtual database reservoir allows for faster analysis of the complexity of a PMA reservoir based
on EAP hydrogel.
To utilize the PMA network, as shown in Figure 5, as a database reservoir the input and output sequences
need to be simpliﬁed to allow for easier comparison to conventional digital computation. For the purpose
of simpliﬁcation, the input and output sequences are represented by the state labels l and k described
in Equations 2 and 3 for input and output sequences, respectively. The PMA takes a sequence of inputs
ðIÞ and maps them to a sequence of outputs ðOÞ utilizing a network of weighted transitions. Using the state
Table 1. Description of reservoir computing components with application within the EAP gel network
Component
Description
Application to Gel
Excitation layer
Input to the reservoir, converting from deﬁned
input symbols to stimulations in the reservoir
network.
Inputs are deﬁned as 1,1 and are applied via
electrical stimulation across the width of the
gel. This is the same system as the excitation
layer used in the Moore Machine framework.
Reservoir
Fixed, non-linear system that is used to map
inputs to higher dimensional space.
EAP hydrogel suspended in the ionic solution
via surface electrodes, stored as a virtual
database through the PMA.
Readout layer
Output from the reservoir. Converts from the
reservoir network to deﬁned output symbols.
This layer is tuned to train the reservoir
computing network.
Bending angle of the gel as viewed from the
side perpendicular to the electric ﬁeld,
binarized (thresholded) into the deﬁned output
symbols of 1,0,1. Tuning is performed
through the optimization of thresholds.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
11
iScience
Article


--- Page 13 ---
labels l and k the PMA becomes a non-linear integer mapping function based on the PMA’s probability dis-
tribution, derived from the recorded responses of the EAP hydrogel. The non-linear function of the integer
mapping becomes the database representation of the EAP hydrogel reservoir, where the output layer is
adjusted through tuning the thresholds t1 and t2 in the output function u, as deﬁned in Equation 4.
In the function of the PMA, the thresholds served to binarize the analog output of the gel to ﬁt a sequential
symbol language. However, in the context of a reservoir tuning the output layer, through the adjustment of
t1and t2, tunes the probabilistic mapping between input and output states. By tuning this probabilistic
mapping, the function of the reservoir can be controlled to serve a purpose. In more general terms, the
reservoir as a whole embodies a large energy landscape of probability maps, but through the adjustment
of the output layer can be tuned to a speciﬁc probability mapping that can be used within a computational
application. An example of a single probabilistic mapping condensed from the reservoir via the thresholds
t1 =  7:8 & t2 = 2:7 is represented in Figure 6, where the input and output sequences are denoted by their
state labels. Shown in Figure 6, for each input state, each output state has a probability of occurrence. For
each input state, there is a single leading output state that has a much higher probability of occurrence than
the other output states. With a larger dataset, it is likely that these outcomes converge further, and this
leading output state will become more pronounced as the minor differences in gel synthesis and experi-
mental procedure become less impactful on the ﬁnal results.
This framework provides a virtual reservoir representation of the complex continuous function of the EAP
hydrogels computation. By tuning the thresholds, the reservoir provides a mapping function of 8 input
states to 27 possible output states. However, for the EAP reservoir to be useful as a computational medium
it must be capable of performing certain computational tasks more efﬁciently than purely digital/binary
based hardware alternatives. The EAP reservoir is structurally simple, comprising of only 3 layers in the au-
tomaton, although the analog nature allows inﬁnite combinations of input and output sequences when
continuous values are considered. For example, by changing the input/output language through the
adjustment of the stimulation voltages or output bending angle thresholds. A digital computer would
never be capable of exactly representing an analog system, but in practice an approximation of analog re-
sults is often sufﬁcient. Any commonly used digital computing system can represent a function through
models stored in memory. Given a digital system with enough memory, any analog system could be
approximated sufﬁciently to be used in a given task. To compare the EAP reservoir with digital systems
the question is, how large would the memory of a digital system need to be to accurately represent the
EAP reservoir. A comprehensive answer to this comparison depends on the application, but by comparing
Figure 6. Probability of each output integer given an input integer using thresholds 7.8 & 2.7 for thresholds 1 &
2, respectively
The probability is shown as a color representing a number between 0 and 1.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 14 ---
the mapping functions generated by the EAP reservoir with a model commonly used in digital computation
systems the difference in memory usage can be visualized.
One of the simplest forms of model that is used within digital computation systems is the polynomial.
Because of polynomial’s simplicity they can be represented on any form of digital computer hardware,
from simple microcontrollers to complex cluster computers. All digital systems use memory to store
functions, in the case of the polynomial it’s the coefﬁcients that require memory space to be stored. The
mapping function generated by tuning the thresholds of the reservoir can be compared to the polynomial
representation of the same function, comparing the memory usage and accuracy of the representation in
each case. In the physical reservoir the mapping functions are continuous like the hydrogel but have been
discretized for the purpose of simplifying the initial framework. This discretization also allows for virtual
reservoir storage and more direct comparison to digital computation. If the polynomial requires as
much memory as used by the mapping function, generated from the virtual representation of the reservoir,
then for that function the reservoir is more efﬁcient in memory usage than the digital polynomial represen-
tation. Which is to say, the hydrogel computation is more efﬁcient than the same computation achieved
utilizing digital computation methods. The memory used in the representation can be correlated with
the number of coefﬁcients required to represent the model. As there are only 8 possible inputs, using 8
coefﬁcients (7th degree polynomial) would essentially create a lookup table and be no more computation-
ally advantageous than the virtually stored EAP reservoir. For this reason polynomials with degrees from
0 to 6 will be tested and their performances assessed.
There are many different modeling methods with some far more optimized; however different methods
require different hardware to run. Polynomials, as one of the simplest modeling techniques, can be imple-
mented on any hardware. This means that using polynomials as the comparison allows the assessment of
the hydrogel reservoir to be hardware agnostic, allowing for a more generalized conclusion for this initial
investigation. In addition, the EAP reservoir already represents the free energy landscape of the physical
system which, in this case, is used to generate the computation, selected by tuning the thresholds. The hy-
drogel does not have to generate this energy landscape as it is inherent to its structure, whereas in the dig-
ital system a computer must generate the landscape representation through the calculation of the polyno-
mial
approximations.
Because
the
computational
resources
used
to
generate
the
polynomial
approximations of the EAP reservoir have no counterpart in the hydrogel’s computation, they will be
ignored when comparing efﬁciency.
To assess the entire free energy landscape of the EAP reservoir, each combination of thresholds needs to
be converted to a reservoir instance and represented digitally for evaluation. To accomplish this, a data-
base of PMA reservoir instances is made containing the probability distribution (as shown in Figure 6) of
the reservoir at every threshold combination. This uses the same threshold range as used in the threshold
optimization earlier in the study, using the minimum to maximum angle reached as the bounds (31.3 and
29.3) with a step of 0.5. The thresholds are applied with Equation 4 where t1 and t2 are the thresholds con-
stants for that iteration of the automata.
kl =
& X
3N
k = 0
Pðk; lÞk
!
+ 0:5
’
(Equation 5)
k =

k0; k1; .; kl; .; kð2N  2Þ; kð2N  1Þ

(Equation 6)
To represent each EAP reservoir instance in the database as a series of polynomials, the probabilistic
component will need to converted to analog outputs. To this aim, we obtain the average output label
for each input sequence using Equation 5, based on the assumption the probability transitions converge
as predicted from the interpretation of Figure 6. Equation 5 deﬁnes how the probability distribution of
output labels for a given input label are averaged to a single output label to create a one-to-one mapping
that the polynomial can attempt to model as a continuous function. kl is the average output state label rep-
resentation k for the input sequence labeled l as found from Equation 2, the average output labels are
stored as a vector k deﬁned in Equation 6 where fkl ˛ Zj0 % kl % 26g. As with the PMAs deﬁnition
before N = 3. In Equation 5Pðk; lÞ gives the probability that the output state k is given when the PMA re-
ceives the input sequence l, as derived from the probability distribution of PMA outputs for a given set of
thresholds.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
13
iScience
Article


--- Page 15 ---
fðlÞ =
X
r
p = 0
aplp
(Equation 7)
k = dfðlÞ + 0:5e
(Equation 8)
argmin
ða0;.;ap;.;arÞ
X
2N  1
l = 0
jf ðlÞ  klj2;
(Equation 9)
subject to : ap ˛ R; ap ˛ ½ 100; 100
With the EAP reservoir instances converted to a series of analog mapping functions, they can now be rep-
resented via polynomials. The generalized polynomial used to represent the continuous EAP reservoir
mapping functions is deﬁned in Equation 7. The polynomial is ﬁtted to the averaged reservoir mapping us-
ing the minimization Equation 9 for a given degree r. fðlÞ is the input to output transition function that maps
input values I to output values O, the result of f is rounded to the closet integer (to correspond with the
integer representation of output sequences) as shown in Equation 8. pis the power, ap is the coefﬁcient
associated with the power p and r is the degree of the polynomial. The number of coefﬁcients used to
represent a polynomial function is representative of the memory required to store that function. So, by
ﬁtting polynomials, with various numbers of coefﬁcients, to the averaged continuous EAP reservoir map-
ping, and analyzing how well each degree of polynomial ﬁt the actual EAP reservoir mapping, the effective-
ness of representing the EAP reservoir digitally can be assessed. Fitting was performed using the polyﬁt
function in Matlab67Polyﬁt uses least-squares minimization via the discriminant of the Vandermonde matrix
to ﬁnd polynomial coefﬁcients of the speciﬁed degree, that most closely represents a given dataset. For
each ﬁtted polynomial, the norm of residuals for the error of kl  k is calculated to represent the accuracy
of the ﬁtting for the polynomial f given the inputs I and average reservoir outputs OI. Each averaged reser-
voir instance in the database is then ﬁtted to a polynomial using degrees from 0 to 6 to visualise how effec-
tive digital systems can represent the free energy landscape of the PMA reservoir.
Using this validation method, the graphs in Figure 7 were generated using the degrees 0, 2, 4 and 6 (graphs
for 1,3 and 5 found in the Figure S4). As described earlier, each pair of threshold values is used to generate a
PMA reservoir instance via the output layer, and a polynomial is ﬁtted to the resultant mapping function of
these reservoirs. These graphs show a norm of residuals heatmap for the ﬁtted polynomials against the
threshold values in the output layer of the PMA reservoir.
More coefﬁcients allow the polynomial to ﬁt the PMA reservoir’s mapping function better, which is to be
expected. The bounds of the tested thresholds (31.3 and 29.3 for t1 and t2 respectively) are always the
points of lowest error. This is expected as these thresholds represent the extremes of the reservoir.
As 31.3 and 29.3 are the maximum and minimum angles achieved by the gel, if the thresholds were set
to these values all output angles would be in a single segment of the thresholded ranges (as shown in Fig-
ure 3 section B), meaning all input sequences would result in the same output sequence. The ‘texture’ of the
heat maps in Figure 7 have consistent patterns of vertical and horizontal lines. These lines are a good rep-
resentation of changing sensitivity in the reservoir’s response to threshold selection. As the thresholds
move closer to recorded output angles of the gel, the impact of the change in threshold value on the res-
ervoir’s structure becomes more signiﬁcant. From the graphs in Figure 7, the ﬁtted polynomials required a
signiﬁcant number of coefﬁcients to be close in ability, with pronounced error present until a polynomial of
4th degree was used. As the number of coefﬁcients approaches the number of possible input sequences,
the polynomial becomes a direct mapping and offers no computational efﬁciency over the reservoir. This
observation gives insight into the kind of hardware memory required to represent the EAP reservoir based
on the number of coefﬁcients used.
The reservoir mapping function being ﬁtted is a sampled average approximation of the true EAP hydrogel
function, reducing the probability component, and using only a 3-symbol input sequence I with a 2-symbol
language. This means that given the simplest form of the EAP reservoir, where the probability function con-
verges causing a simpliﬁcation of the probability component, the reservoir function would still not be able
to be represented by the digital computational method without signiﬁcant error. From this, it is likely that a
purely digital representation of the EAP reservoir in computer hardware, such as with a computer modeling
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 16 ---
method similar to polynomial representation, would not be able to efﬁciently replicate the high complexity
and rich dynamics of the EAP hydrogel reservoir. This ineffectiveness would be even more pronounced
when input and output languages of higher complexity and larger vocabulary are used to encode the re-
sponses of the EAP gel.
Utilizing the reservoir in an application provides an interesting problem, as the task the reservoir’s calcu-
lation contributes to needs to be possible within the computational landscape of the PMA reservoir. Given
a system where events lead to outcomes with certain probabilities of occurrence, such a system can be
simpliﬁed into a PMA structure. It is unlikely that the probabilities will match that of the EAP hydrogel
PMA, but this is where using the PMA as a reservoir allows for it to contribute to computation. The EAP hy-
drogel PMA provides an energy landscape that can be tuned to a given application by changing the inter-
pretation of the response. Altering the output language deﬁnition allows this high dimensional space to be
sampled appropriately for the purpose.
In summary, the sequence of stimulations can be encoded into input sequences, then the output language
can be continually altered until the same probability response of the replicated system is observed. Once
the input language is deﬁned, this reﬁnement of the output language can be performed virtually. The
complexity of the output language does not matter as long as, through its deﬁnition, the desired system
probabilities are present within the resultant mapping function. In this way the full range of the reservoir
may not be used, but the computation it accomplishes can be used to represent/predict the behavior of
the replicated system.
Conclusions
This study assessed the computational ability of EAP hydrogels, using polyacrylamide EAP hydrogel to
explore the embodied cognition, and how a complex soft body can compute. A framework was designed,
using a Probabilistic Moore Automaton (PMA), by constructing a sentence structure for the input stimuli
and output response of the gel. Experimental data was collected to generate a PMA, stored as a database
of EAP responses. The automaton EAP gel system was shown to be capable of computational tasks, utiliz-
ing a form of memory in the gel’s complex dynamics. Through the PMA structure, unique output sequences
were generated from the input sequences.
The theory of computation was then expanded to allow for more complex calculation, combining the
PMA framework with reservoir computing to form a hybrid system. Reservoir Computing allows the
network of active agents within EAP gels to embody a form of parallel processing. The PMA provides
a rich free energy landscape that can be tuned to applications through the adjustment of the input
and output language deﬁnitions. Through analysis of this energy landscape, given the input and output
languages deﬁned in the PMA, the reservoir was shown to be capable of functions that would prove difﬁ-
cult to model via traditional digital computational alternatives with the same analog efﬁciency. With
more complex input-output languages the EAP hydrogel PMA would become even more efﬁcient
Figure 7. Heatmap for the norm of residuals error of ﬁtted polynomials, against the threshold values used in the
output layer of the PMA reservoir instance that the polynomial is ﬁtted to
Each pair of threshold values is used to generate a PMA reservoir by being applied to the output layer and a polynomial is
ﬁtted to the mapping function of these reservoirs. These graphs show the results of polynomial ﬁtting for polynomial
degrees 0, 2, 4, and 6 with graphs 1, 3, and 5 found in the supplementary information ﬁgure S4. The color bar shows the
relative norm of residual values.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
15
iScience
Article


--- Page 17 ---
when compared to purely digital representations, providing an opportunity to calculate effectively with
the EAP hydrogel PMA reservoir.
Future works
As the reservoir is constructed using the PMA, it is best suited to applications commonly used with prob-
abilistic automata, such as statistical29 or behavior prediction.68,69 Given the mechanisms behind the EAP
hydrogel’s computation, it could also be applied to systems that themselves involve memory or consist of
many active agents such as for example crowds of people.70 There are many interesting possible applica-
tions for our approach to utilizing EAP hydrogels for computation. Although the further experimentation
required falls outside the scope of this study, the possibilities are worth discussion for future work.
Reservoirs have also successfully been used in image analysis applications for dataencoding,36 as a
demonstrated reservoir computing application EAP hydrogels could also show much promise in this
area. Furthermore, because of the reservoir’s probabilistic nature, there is the possibility for prediction71
or recognition,72 such as in natural language translation.73 These applications would require an image
be provided to the reservoir as an input. Our current reservoir implements only 3 inputs so for any signif-
icant image more would be required. The reservoirs complexity grows exponentially with additional inputs,
but utilizing encoding the number of required inputs could be reduced. For example, compression tech-
niques could be used, regions or kernels could be applied to encode the data via subsampling into fewer
inputs, or many fewer complex reservoirs applied in parallel. Similar encoding techniques are used in many
neural network image analysis applications.74–76 The outputs would also then need to be processed to
decide how the output of the reservoir represents useful information. Through tuning the reservoir’s output
layer certain patterns can be highlighted, but the output must be interpreted to usefully extract data. These
applications raise many questions regarding the best way to implement the computational ability of the
EAP reservoir, each method must be carefully considered for a given application. This study provides a
strong foundation and evidence of the potential of EAP gel’s application in embodied computation and
future work.
Limitations of the study
In this study certain avenues were not explored such as: variation in voltages to expand the input language
through representation of additional input symbols, additional thresholds to expand the output language
through representation of additional output symbols, different arrangements of electrodes, and different
EAP gel shapes. All these variations in the setup would add further dimensions to the reaction of the EAP as
a computational medium and potentially expand the computational capability as the energy landscape ex-
pands. Furthermore, possible applications were discussed, but the additional work required to formatively
explore them would not ﬁt within the bounds of this study.
Nomenclature
a
Gain parameter a ˛ R
qI
Mean angle for input sequence I qI ˛ R
kl
Mean output state label given by the input sequence labeled l fkl ˛ Zj0 % kl % 26g
Qi
Processed angle Qi ˛ R
Qmax
Maximum output angle present in gel in degrees
Qmin
Minimum output angle present in gel in degrees
I
Input Sequence IðlÞ = ðI1;I2;I3Þ
Ii
Input symbol fIi ˛ Sg
OI
Output sequence OðkÞ = ðO1;O2;O3Þ
Oi
output symbol fOi ˛ Gg
d
Transition relation
G
Output alphabet G = f 1; 0; 1g
i
Initial state i ˛ Q
u
Output function
S
Input alphabet S = f 1; 0; 1g
qi
Angle after symbol i qi ˛ R
A
Probabilistic Moore Automata A = ðQ;S;G;d;P;u;i; Þ
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 18 ---
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead contact
B Materials availability
B Data and code availability
d METHOD DETAILS
B Memory mechanics through ion migration and voltage potential measurement
B Applying EAP gel to a probabilistic moore machine automata
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.105558.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is fully funded by Process Vision Ltd (https://www.processvision.com/).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, V.S. and Y.H.; Methodology, V.S. and Y.H.; Software, V.S.; Formal Analysis, V.S.; Inves-
tigation, V.S.; Writing – Original Draft, V.S., Y.H., and W.H.; Writing – Review and Editing, V.S.,Y.H., and
W.H.; Supervision, Y.H. and W.H.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: May 29, 2022
Revised: October 14, 2022
Accepted: November 9, 2022
Published: December 22, 2022
REFERENCES
1. Moore, C., and Stephan, M. (2011). The
Nature of Computation (OUP Oxford).
2. Ledin, J. (2020). Modern Computer
Architecture and Organization: Learn X86,
ARM, and RISC-V Architectures and the
Design of Smartphones, PCs, and Cloud
Servers (Packt Publishing).
3. Mu¨ ller, V.C., and Hoffmann, M. (2017). What is
morphological computation? On how the
body contributes to cognition and control.
Artif. Life 23, 1–24.
4. Shapiro, L., and Spaulding, S. (2021).
Embodied cognition. In The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2021 edition,
E.N. Zalta, ed. (Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University)).
5. Foglia, L., and Wilson, R.A. (2013). Embodied
cognition. WIREsCogn. Sci. 4, 319–325.
6. Thelen, E., Scho¨ ner, G., Scheier, C., and
Smith, L.B. (2001). The dynamics of
embodiment: a ﬁeld theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behav. Brain Sci.
24, 1–34.
7. Hauser, H., Ijspeert, A.J., Fu¨ chslin, R.M.,
Pfeifer, R., and Maass, W. (2011). Towards a
theoretical foundation for morphological
computation with compliant bodies. Biol.
Cybern. 105, 355–370.
a
Gain minimization parameter a ˛ R
ap
Coefﬁcient associated with the power p ap ˛ R
i
Symbol fi ˛ ZR 0;i % Ng
k
State label representation of O fk ˛ Zj0 % k % 26g
l
State label representation of I fl ˛ Zj0 % l % 7g
N
Sentence length N ˛ ZR 0
p
Power of the coefﬁcient fp ˛ ZR 0;p % rg
Q
Set of Probabilistic Moore Automata States
R
Norm of Residuals R ˛ R
r
Degree of the polynomial r ˛ ZR 0
Si;j
State Si;j ˛ Q
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
17
iScience
Article


--- Page 19 ---
8. Hauser, H., Ijspeert, A.J., Fu¨ chslin, R.M.,
Pfeifer, R., and Maass, W. (2012). The role of
feedback in morphological computation with
compliant bodies. Biol. Cybern. 106,
595–613.
9. Yoshida, R. (2010). Self-oscillating gels driven
by the belousov–zhabotinsky reaction as
novel smart materials. Adv. Mater. 22,
3463–3483.
10. Nakajima, K., Hauser, H., Kang, R.,
Guglielmino, E., Caldwell, D.G., and Pfeifer,
R. (2013). A soft body as a reservoir: case
studies in a dynamic model of octopus-
inspired soft robotic arm. Front.
Comput.Neurosci. 7, 91.
11. Laschi, C., and Mazzolai, B. (2016). Lessons
from animals and plants: the symbiosis of
morphological computation and soft
robotics. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 23,
107–114.
12. Sadeghi, A., Tonazzini, A., Popova, L., and
Mazzolai, B. (2014). A novel growing device
inspired by plant root soil penetration
behaviors. PLoS One 9, e90139.
13. Zhu, T., Yang, H., and Zhang, W. (2016). A
spherical self-adaptive gripper with shrinking
of an elastic membrane. In 2016 International
Conference on Advanced Robotics and
Mechatronics (ICARM) (IEEE), pp. 512–517.
14. Ramaswamy, S. (2017). Active matter. J. Stat.
Mech. 2017, 054002.
15. Parrilla-Gutierrez, J.M., Sharma, A., Tsuda, S.,
Cooper, G.J.T., Aragon-Camarasa, G.,
Donkers, K., and Cronin, L. (2020). A
programmable chemical computer with
memory and pattern recognition. Nat.
Commun. 11, 1442–1448.
16. Gorecki, J., Gizynski, K., Guzowski, J.,
Gorecka, J.N., Garstecki, P., Gruenert, G.,
and Dittrich, P. (2015). Chemical computing
with reaction–diffusion processes. Philos.
Trans. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 373, 20140219.
17. Ku¨ rsten, R., Sushkov, V., and Ihle, T. (2017).
Giant kovacs-like memory effect for active
particles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 188001.
18. Nagai, K.H., Sumino, Y., Montagne, R.,
Aranson, I.S., and Chate´ , H. (2015). Collective
motion of self-propelled particles with
memory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 168001.
19. Duen˜ as-Dı´ez, M., and Pe´ rez-Mercader, J.
(2019). How chemistry computes: language
recognition by non-biochemical chemical
automata. from ﬁnite automata to turing
machines. iScience 19, 514–526.
20. Marchetti, M.C., Joanny, J.F., Ramaswamy, S.,
Liverpool, T.B., Prost, J., Rao, M., and Simha,
R.A. (2013). Hydrodynamics of soft active
matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 1143–1189.
21. Tanaka, T., Nishio, I., Sun, S.T., and Ueno-
Nishio, S. (1982). Collapse of gels in an
electric ﬁeld. Science 218, 467–469.
22. De Tommasi, D., Puglisi, G., and Zurlo, G.
(2014). Hysteresis in electroactive polymers.
Eur. J. Mech. Solid. 48, 16–22.
23. Baer, R.M., and Martinez, H.M. (1974).
Automata and biology. Annu. Rev. Biophys.
Bioeng. 3, 255–291.
24. Rich, E. (2008). Automata, Computability and
Complexity: Theory and Applications
(Pearson Prentice Hall).
25. Katz, E. (2013). Molecular and Supramolecular
Information Processing: From Molecular
Switches to Logic Systems (John
Wiley & Sons).
26. Droste, M., Kuich, W., and Vogler, H. (2009).
Handbook of Weighted Automata (Springer
Science & Business Media).
27. Vidal, E., Thollard, F., de la Higuera, C.,
Casacuberta, F., and Carrasco, R.C. (2005).
Probabilistic ﬁnite-state machines-part i. IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 27,
1013–1025.
28. Ghosh, S., and Bhattacharya, S. (2020). A
data-driven understanding of covid-19
dynamics using sequential genetic algorithm
based probabilistic cellular automata. Appl.
Soft Comput. 96, 106692.
29. Marschall, T., and Rahmann, S. (2008).
Probabilistic arithmetic automata and their
application to pattern matching statistics. In
Annual symposium on combinatorial pattern
matching (Springer), pp. 95–106.
30. Moore, E.F. (1956). Gedanken-experiments
on sequential machines. In AutomataStudies,
34AutomataStudies (Princeton University
Press), pp. 129–153.
31. Marinescu, R., Seceleanu, C., Le Guen, H.,
and Pettersson, P. (2015). A research overview
of tool-supported model-based testing of
requirements-based designs. Adv. Comput.
98, 89–140.
32. Alaghi, A., and Hayes, J.P. (2013). Survey of
stochastic computing. ACM Trans. Embed.
Comput. Syst. 12, 1–19.
33. Mansinghka, V.K. (2009). Natively
Probabilistic Computation (Massachusetts
Institute of Technology: Department of Brain
and Cognitive Sciences). Ph.D.Thesis.
34. Tanaka, G., Yamane, T., He´ roux, J.B., Nakane,
R., Kanazawa, N., Takeda, S., Numata, H.,
Nakano, D., and Hirose, A. (2019). Recent
advances in physical reservoir computing: a
review. Neural Netw. 115, 100–123.
35. Schrauwen, B., Verstraeten, D., and Van
Campenhout, J. (2007). An overview of
reservoir computing: theory, applications and
implementations. In Proceedings of the 15th
european symposium on artiﬁcial neural
networks, pp. 471–482.
36. Fernando, C., and Sojakka, S. (2003). Pattern
recognition in a bucket. In European
conference on artiﬁcial life (Springer),
pp. 588–597.
37. Larger, L., Soriano, M.C., Brunner, D.,
Appeltant, L., Gutierrez, J.M., Pesquera, L.,
Mirasso, C.R., and Fischer, I. (2012). Photonic
information processing beyond turing: an
optoelectronic implementation of reservoir
computing. Opt Express 20, 3241–3249.
38. Mattar, E. (2013). A survey of bio-inspired
robotics hands implementation: new
directions in dexterous manipulation. Rob.
Auton. Syst. 61, 517–544.
39. Arena, P., Bonomo, C., Fortuna, L., Frasca, M.,
and Graziani, S. (2006). Design and control of
an ipmc wormlike robot. IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern.B Cybern. 36, 1044–1052.
40. Guo, S., Shi, L., Ye, X., and Li, L. (2007). A new
jellyﬁsh type of underwater microrobot. In
2007 International Conference on
Mechatronics and Automation (IEEE),
pp. 509–514.
41. Popa, I. (2014). A multi-link kinematics model
for microrobots with artiﬁcial muscle
structure. In ARA Annual Congress
Proceedings, pp. 143–149.
42. Sakurai, R., Nishida, M., Jo, T., Wakao, Y., and
Nakajima, K. (2022). Durable pneumatic
artiﬁcial muscles with electric conductivity for
reliable physical reservoir computing.
J. Robot. Mechatron. 34, 240–248.
43. Horii, Y., Inoue, K., Nishikawa, S., Nakajima,
K., Niiyama, R., and Kuniyoshi, Y. (2021).
Physical reservoir computing in a soft
swimming robot. In ALIFE 2021: The 2021
Conference on Artiﬁcial Life (MIT Press).
44. Sakurai, R., Nishida, M., Sakurai, H., Wakao,
Y., Akashi, N., Kuniyoshi, Y., Minami, Y., and
Nakajima, K. (2020). Emulating a sensor using
soft material dynamics: a reservoir computing
approach to pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle. In
2020 3rd IEEE International Conference on
Soft Robotics (RoboSoft) (IEEE), pp. 710–717.
45. Carpi, F., and De Rossi, D. (2005).
Electroactive polymer-based devices for
e-textiles in biomedicine. IEEE Trans. Inf.
Technol. Biomed. 9, 295–318.
46. Hong, W., Almomani, A., and Montazami, R.
(2017). Electrochemical and morphological
studies of ionic polymer metal composites as
stress sensors. Measurement 95, 128–134.
47. Tanaka, T., Fillmore, D., Sun, S.T., Nishio, I.,
Swislow, G., and Shah, A. (1980). Phase
transitions in ionic gels. Phys. Rev. Lett. 45,
1636–1639.
48. Syed, S., Karadaghy, A., and Zustiak, S. (2015).
Simple polyacrylamide-based multiwell
stiffness assay for the study of stiffness-
dependent cell responses. J. Vis. Exp. 9,
e52643.
49. Bar-Cohen, Y., and Anderson, I.A. (2019).
Electroactive polymer (eap) actuators—
background review. Mech. Soft Mater.
1, 5–14.
50. Atkins, P., and De Paula, J. (2006). Atkins’
Physical Chemistry, 8.
51. Flory, P.J. (1953). Principles of Polymer
Chemistry (Cornell University Press).
52. Yashin, V.V., Suzuki, S., Yoshida, R., and
Balazs, A.C. (2012). Controlling the dynamic
behavior of heterogeneous self-oscillating
gels. J. Mater. Chem. 22, 13625–13636.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
18
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 20 ---
53. Kuksenok, O., Yashin, V.V., and Balazs, A.C.
(2007). Mechanically induced chemical
oscillations and motion in responsive gels.
Soft Matter 3, 1138–1144.
54. Oyen, M.L. (2014). Mechanical
characterisation of hydrogel materials. Int.
Mater. Rev. 59, 44–59.
55. Bassil, M., Davenas, J., and EL Tahchi, M.
(2008). Electrochemical properties and
actuation mechanisms of polyacrylamide
hydrogel for artiﬁcial muscle application.
Sensor.Actuator. B Chem. 134, 496–501.
56. Liu, P., Lv, R., He, Y., Na, B., Wang, B., and Liu,
H. (2019). An integrated, ﬂexible aqueous zn-
ion battery with high energy and power
densities. J. Power Sources 410–411,
137–142.
57. Grune, D., Van Reeuwijk, K., HE, B., Jacobs,
C.J., and Langendoen, K. (2012). Modern
Compiler Design (Springer Science &
Business Media).
58. Shannon, C.E., and McCarthy, J. (2016).
Automata Studies.(AM-34), 34 (Princeton
University Press).
59. Goodwin, G.C., Graebe, S.F., and Salgado,
M.E. (2001). Control System Design
(Prentice Hall).
60. Shiblee, M.N.I., Furukawa, H., Ahmed, K., and
Kawakami, M. (2019). 4d printing of shape-
memory hydrogels for soft-robotic functions.
Adv. Mater. Technol. 4, 1900071.
61. Denisin, A.K., and Pruitt, B.L. (2016). Tuning
the range of polyacrylamide gel stiffness for
mechanobiology applications. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 8, 21893–21902.
62. Zhang, Y., Wu, H., and Cheng, L. (2012). Some
new deformation formulas about variance
and covariance. In 2012 Proceedings of
International Conference on Modelling,
Identiﬁcation and Control (IEEE),
pp. 987–992.
63. Altman, D.G. (2005). Categorizing continuous
variables. Encycl. Biostat. 1.
64. Soriano, M.C. (2017). Reservoir computing
speeds up. Physics 10, 12.
65. Horii, Y., Inoue, K., Nishikawa, S., Nakajima,
K., Niiyama, R., and Kuniyoshi, Y. (2021).
Physical reservoir Computing in a Soft
Swimming Robot, ALIFE 2022: The 2022
Conference on Artiﬁcial Life. In ALIFE 2021:
The 2021 Conference on Artiﬁcial Life, p. 92.
66. Van der Sande, G., Brunner, D., and Soriano,
M.C. (2017). Advances in photonic reservoir
computing. Nanophotonics 6, 561–576.
67. Mathworks, P.. https://www.mathworks.com/
help/matlab/ref/polyﬁt.html.
68. Zylberberg, J., and DeWeese, M.R. (2011).
How should prey animals respond to
uncertain threats? Front. Comput.Neurosci.
5, 20.
69. Chittaro, L., and Serra, M. (2004). Behavioral
programming of autonomous characters
based on probabilistic automata and
personality. Comput. Animat. Virtual Worlds
15, 319–326.
70. Bottinelli, A., Sumpter, D.T.J., and Silverberg,
J.L. (2016). Emergent structural mechanisms
for high-density collective motion inspired by
human crowds. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 228301.
71. Hu, A., Cotter, F., Mohan, N., Gurau, C., and
Kendall, A. (2020). Probabilistic future
prediction for video scene understanding. In
European Conference on Computer Vision
(Springer), pp. 767–785.
72. Wu, S.G., Bao, F.S., Xu, E.Y., Wang, Y.X.,
Chang, Y.F., and Xiang, Q.L. (2007). A leaf
recognition algorithm for plant classiﬁcation
using probabilistic neural network. In 2007
IEEE international symposium on signal
processing and information technology
(IEEE), pp. 11–16.
73. Hsu, A.S., Chater, N., and Vita´nyi, P.M.B.
(2011). The probabilistic analysis of language
acquisition: theoretical, computational, and
experimental analysis. Cognition 120,
380–390.
74. O’Shea, K., and Nash, R. (2015). An
introduction to convolutional neural
networks. Preprint at arXiv.
75. Cong, J., and Xiao, B. (2014). Minimizing
computation in convolutional neural
networks. In International conference on
artiﬁcial neural networks (Springer),
pp. 281–290.
76. Iakymchuk, T., Rosado-Mun˜ oz, A., Guerrero-
Martı´nez, J.F., Bataller-Mompea´n, M., and
France´ s-Vı´llora, J.V. (2015). Simpliﬁed spiking
neural network architecture and stdp learning
algorithm applied to image classiﬁcation.
EURASIP J. Image Video Process. 1–11.
77. Seida, Y., and Nakano, Y. (1996). Effect of salt
on the property of adsorption in
thermosensitive polymer hydrogel. J. Chem.
Eng. Jpn. 29, 767–772.
78. Doi, E. (1993). Gels and gelling of globular
proteins. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 4, 1–5.
79. Wiyadi, E., Wati, A., Hamzah, Y., and Umar, L.
(2020). Simple iv acquisition module with high
side current sensing principle for real time
photovoltaic measurement. In Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, 1528Journal of
Physics: Conference Series (IOP Publishing),
p. 012040.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
19
iScience
Article


--- Page 21 ---
STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the lead con-
tact, Dr. Yoshikatsu Hayashi (y.hayashi@reading.ac.uk).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
 Datasets containing the voltage potential responses of the gel and automaton angle data respectively
have been deposited at Zenodo and are publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed
in the key resources table.
 All original code has been deposited at Zenodo and is publicly available as of the date of publication.
DOIs are listed in the key resources table.
 Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead
contact upon request.
METHOD DETAILS
Memory mechanics through ion migration and voltage potential measurement
The Polyacrylamide gels are synthesised using the methodology detailed in the step by step methodology
in the supplemental information in Methods S3 00Polyacrylamide Hydrogel Synthesis Procedure’’. The Poly-
acrylamide gels are suspended in a sodium chloride solution ð0:08%Þ between aluminum electrodes
(aluminum electrodes gave the best results of bending with minimal corrosion) as shown in Figure 1 section
a and b. The solution increases the ionic concentration difference between the ionic hydrogel and
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
Acrylamide
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# A8887-100G
N,N0-Methylenebisacrylamide
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# M7279-25G
Ammonium Persulfate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# A3678-25G
N,N,N0,N0-Tetramethylethylenediamine
(TEMED)
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# T9281-50ML
Sodium Chloride
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat# S7653-250G
Deposited data
Datasets S1 and S2
Zenodo
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7274655
Software and algorithms
MATLABR2021a
Mathworks
https://uk.mathworks.com/products/matlab.
html
MATLAB code developed for this research
Zenodo
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7274655
Other
Single Output DC Bench
Power Supply 0–30V/0-3A -
CPC Farnel
Cat# IN06822
Current/Voltage/Power
Monitor Integrated Circuit
Texas Instruments
Cat# INA219
ll
OPEN ACCESS
20
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article


--- Page 22 ---
surrounding solution, allowing bending because of the change in the absorption property of the gel.77 A
camera records bending motion which is translated into angle values. A black screen is placed behind the
hydrogels to increase visibility on recorded video data, against a black background the gels appears blue
because of Rayleigh and Mie scattering.78 Sequences of voltages are used to stimulate the gel (+31 V
referred to as 1 and -31 V referred to as 1, across the 6.4 mm width of the gel), 31 V was used as it was
the maximum output of the power supply and caused swelling in the gel at a reliable rate during experi-
mentation. AINA219 current sensor is placed in line with the driving voltage, recording current and voltage
potential values with time stamps to align with the video data. This voltage potential measurement system
does introduce some noise but does not effect the collected results.79 Eight stimulation sequences are
applied to the gel representing every combination of positive and negative stimulations in a 3-input
sequence (-1-1-1, -1-11, -11-1, 111, 1-1-1, 1–11, 11-1, 111).
 For each experiment fresh aluminum electrodes were applied to the suspension apparatus with wires
afﬁxed behind the electrodes.
 The gel was placed between electrodes with both sides touching the gel shown in Figure 1 section a
and b. A voltage of 31v was applied in both polarities twice for 10 s each time to adhere the gel to the
electrodes by pulling the charged gel polymer into the texture of the electrode. 10 s was found to be the
shortest time needed to adhere the electrodes.
 The suspension apparatus along with the gel were placed in a beaker of sodium chloride solution
shown in Figure 1 section a.
 The camera was adjusted to place the gel in center view parallel to the suspension apparatus.
 The video recording was started along with the voltage potential recording. A sequence of stimula-
tions were applied to the gel, each stimulation applied for 90 s with 10 s breaks between stimulations.
A stimulation length of 90 s was used being the shortest time allowing visible bending to occur.
 The video was segmented into a set of pictures representing the output of each stimulation, with an
initial image used as the gel at t = 0.
The code used to analyze the data collected from these experiments can be found in the repository
10.5281/zenodo.7274655 in folder ‘‘Experiment _1-Memory _Mechanics _Through _Ion _Migration _and
_Voltage _Potential _Measurement’’.In addition to these steps temperature and humidity can affect the
response of EAP hydrogels. The elastic properties of the gel are a function of temperature.21,47 For this
reason, the puriﬁed water used in the ionic solution, although not temperature controlled during the exper-
iment, is from a temperature controlled source (22C), so the experiments would always start at the same
temperature. As the gels rely on water molecules to swell the hydrogel’s water content also affects the
response and as such so can humidity. Suspension in the ionic solution prevents the inﬂuence of ambient
humidity on the gels during experimentation. The gels are also stored in watertight containers in between
experimentation to maintain moisture content until use.
Applying EAP gel to a probabilistic moore machine automata
The input sentences are applied to the gel using the same sequential stimulation procedure and apparatus
as in the Memory Mechanics experiment of the previous section. Every permutation of input symbols (8 se-
quences) is applied to a new gel so that sequences have no inﬂuence on each-other. This is because there is
no guarantee that, in practice, previous stimulation on a gel will not affect future behavior even after sig-
niﬁcant rest time. This is done 8 times resulting in 64 separate experiments to collect enough data to estab-
lish results consistency in every path through a 3-symbol tree. These input sequences are applied with the
same voltage and timing as in the Memory Mechanics experiment, using 90 s per input with 10 s breaks to
change electrode polarity. Values used for concentration, voltage, and times can be altered changing the
gel’s response to input sequences but requires more detailed experimentation to analyze the best condi-
tions, beyond the scope of this study. Once data is collected the video is segmented into a series of images,
representing the end of each input symbol and one at t = 0 used to ﬁnd the change in bending angle. As
bending occurs over the length of the gel the angle is measured using the mid-point at the gel’s tip and the
edge of the suspension apparatus, shown in Figure 1 section C. The code used to analyze the data
collected from these experiments can be found in the repository https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
21
iScience
Article


--- Page 23 ---
7274655 in folders ’’Experiment _2-Applying _EAP _gel _to _a _Moore _Machine _Automata’’ and ‘‘Exper-
iment _3-Applying _Moore _Reservoir _Hybrid _to _Collected _Data’’.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All data analysis was performed using code written in the MATLAB environment, details on this code and
MATLAB datasets can be found in the readme in the code and dataset repository as indicated by the DOI in
the key resources table. When collecting the data, each path through the 3 layer automaton was explored
with a new gel, this led to 8 gels required to fully explore every path of the automaton state tree. Each path
was then repeated a further 8 times to ensure accurate representation in the results, this gave a total of 64
individual experiments ran with a new gel for each experiment. The statistical analysis, of the application of
the EAP hydrogels to reservoir computing, is detailed in section ‘‘probabilistic mooreautomata as a
computational reservoir’’. Polynomials of varying degrees were applied to the resultant reservoir of each
threshold pair to allow the comparison of memory usage, where the degree of the polynomial represents
the memory needed by the computer to replicate the computation in the EAP gel reservoir. The signiﬁ-
cance in this application of EAP gels to computation was justiﬁed if the polynomial representation required
as much memory as the resultant reservoir, thus making the EAP reservoir more efﬁcient.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
22
iScience 25, 105558, December 22, 2022
iScience
Article
