--- Page 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOBIOSCIENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2008
249
Bioelectronic Imaging Array Based on
Bacteriorhodopsin Film
Wei Wei Wang*, Member, IEEE, George K. Knopf, Member, IEEE, and Amarjeet S. Bassi
Abstract—A photoreceptor array that exploits the light sensitive
bacteriorhodopsin (bR) ﬁlms has been manufactured on a ﬂexible
indium-tin-oxide (ITO) coated plastic ﬁlm using electrophoretic
sedimentation technique (EPS). The effective sensing area of each
photoreceptor is 2
2 mm2, separated by 1 mm and arranged in
a 4
4 array. A switched integrator with gain on the order of
1010 is used to amplify the signal to a suitable level. When ex-
posed to light, the differential response characteristic is attributed
to charge displacement and recombination within bR molecules,
as well as loading effects of the attached ampliﬁer. The peak spec-
tral response occurs at 568 nm and is linear over the tested light
power range of 200
W to 12 mW. The response remains linear
at other tested wavelengths, but with reduced amplitude. Initial
tests have indicated that responsivity among all photoreceptors is
greater than 71% of the average value, 465.25 mV/mW. The dif-
ferential nature of the signal generated by bR makes it a suitable
sensing material for vision applications such as motion detection.
The prototype array demonstrates this property by employing Re-
ichardt’s delay-and-correlate algorithm. Furthermore, fabricating
sensor arrays on ﬂexible substrates introduces a new design ap-
proach that enables non-planar imaging surfaces.
Index Terms—Bacteriorhodopsin, bioelectronic photoreceptor
array, ITO coated PET ﬁlm, imaging array, motion detection.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
LTHOUGH tremendous progress has been made in high-
speed computing and high-resolution CCD and CMOS
image sensors, machine vision systems still cannot mimic the
information processing capabilities of their biological counter-
parts. This fact has caused some artiﬁcial vision researchers to
explore deeper the optical structure and fundamental signal pro-
cessing mechanisms in natural vision. One key feature of bio-
logical vision is that information processing begins at the retinal
level; a dramatically different approach from conventional ar-
tiﬁcial vision systems, where the only signal processing at the
sensing stage is simple signal conditioning and analog-to-digital
Manuscript received January 18, 2007; revised April 04, 2008. Current ver-
sion published February 06, 2009. This work was supported by the Natural Sci-
ences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Canada
Foundation for Innovation (CFI), and Photonics Research Ontario (PRO). As-
terisk indicates corresponding author.
*W. W. Wang was with the University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A
5B9 Canada. She is now with the Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uni-
versity of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1 Canada (e-mail: ww3wang@sci-
borg.uwaterloo.ca).
G. K. Knopf is with the Department of Mechanical & Materials Engineering,
the University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B9 Canada (fax: 519-
685-2399, e-mail: gknopf@eng.uwo.ca).
A. S. Bassi is with the Department of Chemical & Biochemical Engineering,
the University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B9 Canada (e-mail:
abassi@eng.uwo.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNB.2008.2011851
conversion. As a result, salient features of the visual information
are often lost in these artiﬁcial systems.
Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) technology is an
emerging approach in the development of biologically inspired
vision systems where imaging sensing and signal processing are
combined at the sensor level [1]–[3]. This dramatically reduces
the information transmitted to the central computer for further
processing. Thus, applications that require real-time visual
information can become viable. However, the construction of
a compact integration of sensors and processing circuitry is a
signiﬁcant challenge for the design of truly robust vision chips.
In contrast, biological photoreceptors are comparably simple
and demonstrate inherent preprocessing capabilities. Further-
more, they are energy efﬁcient and can be easily fabricated on
non-silicon ﬂexible substrates using low-cost manufacturing
processes. In this manner, biological photoreceptors deposited
on ﬂexible electronic circuits can be used to develop innovative
bioelectronic imaging technologies that are not conﬁned to
planar sensor arrays with single sized rectangular pixels.
The most extensively studied biological material for creating
an artiﬁcial photodetector is bacteriorhodopsin (bR), a light sen-
sitive receptor used for signal transduction in Halobacterium
salinarium [4]. It exhibits similar structure and photophysical
processes to those of rhodopsin found in the eyes of higher
order creatures. The bR molecule employs solar energy to trans-
port hydrogen ions across the bacterial cell membrane, thus
generating a potential difference necessary for driving the syn-
thesis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from adenosine diphos-
phate (ADP). Under anaerobic conditions the cell membrane
grows purple membrane (PM) patches in the form of a hexag-
onal two-dimensional crystalline lattice of bR trimers [5]. Each
bR molecule consists of 248 amino acid residues in a polypep-
tide chain, which is arranged in seven
-helices and encloses
the retinal residue, several key amino-acid residues and water
molecules within the cavity [6]. This cavity deﬁnes the proton
transport pathway and shields the chromophoric group from ex-
ternal environmental inﬂuences. The amino acids surrounding
the retinal inﬂuence the absorption properties. The crystalline
structure is the root of bR’s chemical and thermal stability. PM
is stable against sunlight exposure in the presence of oxygen for
several years. In water, its stability holds for temperatures over
80 C, pH values ranging from 0 to 12 and in the presence of
high ionic concentrations (up to 3 M NaCl) [7]. The PM even
preserves its colour and photochemical activity in dry condi-
tions, and can withstand temperatures up to 140 C [8].
A variety of efforts to incorporate bR into photoelectronic de-
vices have been made since the last decade. Feature extraction
and pattern recognition are two major visual functions that have
been explored by various researchers. The former corresponds
1536-1241/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 2 ---
250
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOBIOSCIENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2008
to the detection and location of spatial and temporal variations
in image intensity which is essential for edge enhancement
and motion detection applications. Takei et al. [10] and Yang
et al. [11] have each developed a bR-based artiﬁcial receptive
ﬁeld. The photoelectric response polarity is used to emulate
excitation and inhibition within neural computation in these de-
signs. Haronian and Lewis further explored parallel processing
by developing a rapidly reprogrammable neural network ar-
chitecture with the possibility of employing a large synapse
matrix [12]. A bR-based array that is capable of presenting
edge information in real time was developed by Miyaska and
Koyama [13]. Fukuzawa later presented a position-sensitive
motion sensor that uses the image-recording capability of bR
under high pH conditions [14]. Visual pattern recognition
is high-level information processing within a vision system.
Min et al. demonstrated a sensing array coved by bR ﬁlms,
where some degree of image extraction and pattern recognition
was achieved by applying an initial learning process to ﬁlm
conﬁgurations [15]. Two types of bR sensor arrays have been
developed for color recognition: Frydrych et al. [16] employed
bR and its variants, whereas Choi et al. [17] integrated bR with
ﬂavins. Artiﬁcial neural networks that are trained for colour
space recognition allow such systems to learn observed colours
and adapt to their environment.
This paper presents a bioelectronic photoreceptor array cre-
ated by depositing bR material on a patterned ﬂexible indium-
tin-oxide (ITO) coated plastic ﬁlm and illustrates how the novel
imaging technology can be applied to the design of an artiﬁcial
vision system by implementing a motion detection algorithm.
The simple motion detection system is based on Reichardt’s
delay-and-correlate model. The device is capable of detecting
both the speed and direction of a moving light source. In this ap-
plication, the differential photosensitivity of bR performs tem-
poral preprocessing at the material level, eliminating the need
for additional circuitry used by a conventional vision chip.
The direct deposit of photosensitive biomaterials onto low-
cost ﬂexible polymer electronic circuits introduces a new de-
sign approach to developing non-planar imaging systems that
can provide an increased ﬁeld-of-view, enhanced focusing ca-
pabilities, and enlarged sensing area. An illustration of how a
non-traditional wide ﬁeld-of view (FOV) imaging system for
surveillance applications can be created using the photoelectric
characteristics of dried bR thin ﬁlms, mechanical ﬂexibility of
printed electronic circuits on plastic substrates, and bendable
polymer micro lens is presented in Section V.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Flexible Electrode
A mechanically durable polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
ﬁlm that possesses high light transmission (typically
%
over the visible spectral range is used as the substrate in this
work. A patterned ITO layer is deposited onto the ﬂexible
substrate via pulsed laser deposition (Sheldahl Inc). The ITO
coated ﬁlm has a surface resistance of 35 ohms/sq. The ﬂexible
ITO electrode is imprinted with a 4
4 array pattern where
each electrode element is 2
2 mm
and is separated by 1
mm distance between neighboring pixels. Independent ITO
Fig. 1. Flexible photoreceptor array fabrication process illustrated by pro-
ducing one sensing element.
wires, each 300
m wide, connect the pixel with a connection
terminal along substrate edge. The overall area of a patterned
ITO electrode is 15 mm by 23 mm.
B. bR Photoreceptor Array
PM patches, like many other cell membrane materials, main-
tain a small potential across themselves. This small potential
arises from differences in charge densities across the molecule.
The cytoplasmic side of the membrane is negative with respect
to the extracellular side at pH values between 5 and 7; the po-
larity reverses when the pH falls below 5 [18]. The EPS process
utilizes this material property by applying an electric ﬁeld across
the PM suspension. The patches align with the external ﬁeld and
travel to the anode where they collect onto the electrode surface.
This provides a simple and effective means of achieving high
degree of bR orientation during ﬁlm formation.
Fig. 1 illustrates the fabrication process used to create the
prototype array. The PM suspension containing wild-type bR
is prepared according to the previously reported method [9].
To create the array, 100
L of PM suspension is ejected from
a pipette evenly over the patterned surface. A 1.0 mm plastic
spacer (not shown) is placed around the array to separate the two
electrodes. An external power supply is connected such that the
bottom electrode becomes the anode and the top becomes the
cathode. An electric ﬁeld of 40 V/cm is applied for ﬁve minutes.
The top electrode is then lifted and the remaining bulk water is
carefully removed with a pipette. The ﬁlm is allowed to dry by
placing it in a humidity-regulated chamber for 12 hours. When
dry, a PET ﬁlm with a continuous ITO coating is then aligned
with the dried bR pixels and sealed carefully along the edge by
using a fast-curing epoxy resin. A photograph of the bR pho-
toreceptor array on ﬂexible PET substrate is shown in Fig. 2.
Two ﬂexible ribbon cables are used to connect the array to the
readout electronics. Such a connection maintains device ﬂexi-
bility ad while keeping good contact.
C. Instrumentation Circuitry
The dashed box at the left-hand side of Fig. 3 shows an equiv-
alent circuit model of a bR photoreceptor [19]. The components
in this model correspond to analogues in the bR photoreceptor’s
physical model. The overall behavior of the bR molecule is that
of a current generator,
. Considering the ﬁnite resistance of
protein medium,
, the current source can also be described
by an equivalent electric potential source,
. Since the
lipids within the membrane exhibit a high dielectric constant,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 3 ---
WANG* et al.: BIOELECTRONIC IMAGING ARRAY BASED ON BACTERIORHODOPSIN FILM
251
Fig. 2. Photograph of the 16-pixel bR photoreceptor array on ﬂexible PET sub-
strate.
Fig. 3. Schematic representation of a complete front-end conﬁguration for one
bR photoreceptor. Three dashed boxes include the simpliﬁed bR model, IVC102
switched integrator and sample & hold circuitry.
they can be modeled as the combination of a series capacitor
and a series resistor
. The parallel combination of resistor
and capacitor
with the current source describes the behavior
in non-illuminated bR molecules in conjunction with lipids per-
pendicular to the bR orientation direction.
The resistance of a bR photoreceptor is in the range of
, therefore its performance is highly dependent on the
electronic circuitry used to condition and amplify the extremely-
small signal. A highly optimized electronic circuit with high
input impedance and low noise ampliﬁcation is designed. The
proposed design employs a switched integrator as a preampli-
ﬁer for each photoreceptor. The circuit diagram in Fig. 3 shows
a precision switched integrator (IVC102) that combines a FET
op-amp, integrating capacitors and low leakage FET switches
onto a single chip. The photoreceptor output connects to the in-
verting input via a sample switch
, where the non-inverting
input is grounded. The reset switch
is in parallel with the inte-
grating capacitors to provide a discharge path. Ampliﬁer output
is connected to a holding capacitor via a readout switch
. The
digital timing inputs to
are compatible with standard
TTL logic signals. A PIC12F675 microcontroller is used to con-
trol the digital timing functions. Multi-channel readout architec-
ture is used to transfer the information from each photoreceptor
to the signal processing circuitry. This design simpliﬁes array
fabrication since no shift registers need to be considered at this
Fig. 4. AFM image of a bR ﬁlm on ITO-PET ﬁlm fabricated by EPS.
Fig. 5. Amplitude spectrum of the signal generated by the bR photoreceptor
in response to a 10 Hz input signal. This amplitude spectrum in volts RMS is
calculated by using the FFT function in MATLAB.
time. The multi-channel design also reduces the information to
be transferred and increases the transfer bandwidth.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Surface Topology
The uniformity of bR ﬁlms is an important factor when eval-
uating bR photoreceptors’ performance. Characterization of an
EPS-fabricated bR-ITO-PET ﬁlm is carried out using atomic
force microscopy (AFM), which provides detailed information
about the surface topology and homogeneity of the ﬁlm down
to the nanometer scale. Fig. 4 shows an AFM image of a dried
bR ﬁlm deposited on the ITO-PET ﬁlm. It is indicated that the
PM patches are uniformly absorbed onto the ITO electrode and
the bR ﬁlm surface is smooth with ﬂatness in sub-micrometer
range.
B. Sensitivity
The amount of noise present in a single bR photoreceptor
determines the smallest signal that can be detected. Therefore,
lower noise levels offer better sensitivity. The signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) is an important parameter that is used to quantify
a bR photoreceptor’s performance. The noise sources that con-
tribute to the output of a bR photoreceptor may involve pho-
toreceptor shot noise and thermal noise, ampliﬁer current noise
and voltage noise. Of these, shot noise and thermal noise are the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 4 ---
252
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOBIOSCIENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2008
Fig. 6. Dynamic range of photoelectric signals generated by a bR photore-
ceptor in response to the laser beam over different wavelengths.
most signiﬁcant. The SNR is obtained experimentally by mea-
suring the signal of a laser beam source operating at a wave-
length of 568 nm and modulated at 10 Hz by means of an optical
chopper that was placed in the beam path. An oscilloscope is
used to record the time-domain signal. The data acquisition rate
is set to 400 Hz as the integration time of the switched integrator
is 20 ms which sets the upper limit of the response time. The
amplitude spectrum in RMS volts is obtained by taking the Fast
Fourier Transform (FFT) and plotting it as shown in Fig. 5. The
SNR is approximated as the ratio of the peak height at the light
modulation frequency to the noise amplitude in a 200 Hz mea-
surement band. Under intense illumination, the noise power is a
function of illumination power. The highest SNR value, 35.37
dB, is obtained from an illumination power of 22 mW. A high
SNR can be achieved by improving photoreceptor fabrication
and the front-end ampliﬁer design.
C. Spectral Response and Dynamic Range
The magnitude of the photocurrent generated by a bR pho-
toreceptor is dependent upon the wavelength and the intensity
of the incident light (provided that saturation does not occur).
These properties are investigated experimentally with a tunable
Argon/Krypton laser system as the light source. It has nine se-
lectable wavelengths ranging from 476 nm (blue) to 676 nm
(red) (Melles Griot, 35KAP431-220). The dynamic range of a
bR photoreceptor is tested over seven wavelengths; the laser
beam is adjusted using a beam expander to cover the entire pho-
toreceptor area. The illumination power level of the light with
different wavelengths is plotted against the photoreceptor’s re-
sponse in Fig. 6. It shows that the peak signal amplitudes for
seven wavelengths are approximately linear over the light power
range between 200
W to 12 mW. In addition, the photore-
ceptor responds with higher sensitivity to some wavelengths
than others. The maximum photoelectric response occurs in the
vicinity of 570 nm, which is identical to the optical absorption
peak of bR.
D. Array Uniformity and Flexibility
Variations in local fabrication conditions and the lead re-
sistances of individual photoreceptors may cause variations in
light sensitivity between individual photoreceptors within the
bR array. The photoresponse of each photoreceptor is measured
under identical illumination conditions to determine array’s
uniformity. Differential response generated by each photore-
ceptor is measured by illuminating the bR array using a laser
beam with a single wavelength of 568 nm and power of 2.5
mW. The results show that photoresponse uniformity across the
array is more than 71% of the average value, 465.25 mV/mW.
Flexibility of the bR array under mechanical bending is also
tested by wrapping the array around rigid tubes of different
diameters. It is found that the photoreceptors keep identical
responsivity without any cracks and exfoliation, even at the
bend radius of 10 mm.
IV. MOTION DETECTION
A. Motion Detection Algorithm
Motion detection is one of the basic tasks performed by nearly
all biological vision systems. It also plays an important role in
engineering applications, such as mobile robot navigation and
video surveillance. The differential response characteristics of
bR make it promising for vision motion detection [20]. Con-
ventional motion detection algorithms based on intensity, fea-
ture and correlation are computationally expensive and difﬁcult
to realize in hardware.
In contrast, biologically inspired vision models provide a sim-
pler architecture and are more suitable for hardware implemen-
tations. The Reichardt motion model that describes an insect’s
visual response is a common motion detection model imple-
mented in vision chips [21]. It employs a delayed-coincidence
detector that compares light intensity at two locations separated
by a time delay. It can determine both direction and speed of the
observed motion. To achieve robust performance, an improved
Reichardt model, the delay-and-correlate algorithm, is adopted
for the proposed application. This model uses temporal edges as
the image features and correlates them by using binary pulses
[22].
Fig. 7 illustrates the architecture of delay-and-correlate algo-
rithm that involves a feature extraction stage, a pulse shaping
stage, and a direction and speed detection stage. The incident
light is transformed into electric signals by the photoreceptors
and
in the ﬁrst stage. The edge detectors process the
signals to generate a current pulse containing temporal edge in-
formation. The current pulses are converted into voltage pulses
by pulse generating circuits in the second stage where the pulse
holding circuit adds a delay to the voltage pulse. When the de-
layed and non-delayed signals arrive simultaneously at the ﬁnal
stage, the resulting signal indicates a particular direction of mo-
tion: a positive output for rightward movement and negative for
leftward movement. The overlap width of the two pulses from
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 5 ---
WANG* et al.: BIOELECTRONIC IMAGING ARRAY BASED ON BACTERIORHODOPSIN FILM
253
Fig. 7. Block diagram of the modiﬁed Reichardt’s correlation model for motion
detection. The dashed boxes indicate the functions that can be accomplished by
bR photoreceptors. Temporal relation is not indicated in this diagram.
the previous pulse holding stage contains the velocity informa-
tion.
B. Hardware Implementation
The applied motion detection model has been developed for
hardware implementation which involves three separate stages:
feature extraction, pulse shaping, and direction & speed de-
tection. Fig. 8 shows a schematic block diagram of the pro-
cessing architecture. In order to simplify prototype develop-
ment, the bR photoreceptor front-end circuitry interfaces with
a microcontroller. This allows the later two processing stages
to be simulated by microcontrollers rather than implemented
using discrete components. Time delay, pulse shaping and di-
rection/speed detection for a row of four bR pixels is simulated
using a PIC16F684 microcontroller. There is an analog trig-
gering stage between the switched integrator outputs and micro-
controller inputs. This allows the microcontroller to simultane-
ously sample the four pixel channels digitally. Reading digital
signals directly eliminates the need for time-consuming and se-
quential analog to digital conversion. Based on the current im-
plementation, the four input pins are sampled at a rate of 500
HZ, which is sufﬁciently greater than the sampling frequency
of the switched integrator.
Motion is determined by correlating the delayed digital input
from one photoreceptor with the appearance of a digital signal
from a neighbouring photoreceptor. Photoreceptor positions
(input channels) are used to determine the motion direction and
a binary local direction signal is set for each photoreceptor pair.
Speed is extracted by measuring the time interval between two
photoreceptors. The outputs of every two neighbouring pho-
toreceptors are integrated to produce a global motion measure,
which is proportional to the average motion speed. Depending
Fig. 8. Block diagram illustrating the motion detection implementation for a
row of bR photoreceptors. Several functions are simulated within a PIC micro-
controller to simplify prototyping and experimentation.
Fig. 9. Experimental setup for motion detection measurement by using a bR
array.
on the intended application, the global motion information can
be transmitted to the external system in desired formats.
C. Experimental Setup and Results
The measurements are conducted by detecting a moving light
bar using the proposed photoreceptor array. The bR array and
ampliﬁcation circuitry are located inside a shielded enclosure
with an opening to expose the array. As shown in Fig. 9, the
light beam that is generated by a tunable laser passes through a
beam expander and an optical periscope where the translation
stage and a cylindrical lens is aligned with the beam. The cylin-
drical lens expands the circular beam to resemble a bar, which
is then reﬂected by a surface mirror onto the prototype array.
The translation stage can sweep the light bar across the array
at a velocity range of 20 mm/s to 80 mm/s. A four-channel os-
cilloscope captures signals generated by bR photoreceptors and
a two-channel oscilloscope records the output from the motion
detection circuitry.
Fig. 10 shows the signals corresponding to the different mo-
tion detection stages as a laser beam scans four columns of
the prototype array from left to right at a velocity of 40 mm/s.
Fig. 10(a) shows the raw differential signal from each column
channel. These signals are fed into four voltage comparators to
produce a TTL output, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The threshold
of each comparator can be tuned independently to compensate
for differences in photoreceptor sensitivity. These digital signals
are then read in by the microcontroller. Fig. 10(c) shows the two
output traces. The upper trace shows the PWM signal of which
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 6 ---
254
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOBIOSCIENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2008
Fig. 10. Motion detection results from four columns of the prototype array. (a)
The raw output from the ampliﬁers shows progressive photoreceptor responses
as the light bar moves rightward. (b) The differential response is converted to a
digital TTL signal using voltage comparators as the triggering mechanism. (c)
The generated PWM signal is proportional to the accumulated motion informa-
tion (top trace) and a direction for the motion (bottom trace). The middle trace
is produced by applying the signal integration function of the oscilloscope to
the PWM signal.
the duty-cycle is proportional to motion speed. The lower trace
indicates direction. The integration math function of the oscil-
loscope is applied to the PWM signal, since the duration of the
signal is much too long to clearly indicate a steadily increasing
in duty-cycle. Instead, the slope continuously increases, signi-
fying that the duty-cycle is increasing. This method of inte-
grating motion information may be useful for motorized sys-
tems, as movement can begin as soon as motion is detected.
Velocity measurements have been collected using this mo-
tion detection system, as shown in Fig. 11. The light bar is
swept from left to right at velocities ranging from 20 mm/s to 80
mm/s. Results indicate an approximately linear relationship, as
expected. From Fig. 10(a), it is apparent that some signal vari-
ations occur; this is mostly due to noise present in the system.
Distortions in the differential signal proﬁle lead to inconsistent
Fig. 11. Measured duty-cycle versus the velocity of a light bar moving in a
rightward direction. Four array columns are employed; each 2 mm  2 mm pho-
toreceptor is separated by a 1 mm gap. A linear function is ﬁt to the measured
duty-cycles. One measurement is taken at each velocity.
triggering, which in turn produces error in the velocity estima-
tion. Improving the system design and packaging will certainly
improve measurement robustness in this application.
V. FLEXIBLE IMAGING SYSTEM
The functionality and performance capability of commercial
imaging systems are often limited by the complex optical
assemblies used to project time-varying 3D spatial information
onto the ﬂat surface of a charged-couple device (CCD) or
CMOS array. The planar sensor array is composed of numerous
uniformly distributed light sensing elements fabricated on a
ﬂat rigid silicon substrate. In contrast, the direct deposit of
photosensitive biomaterials onto low-cost ﬂexible polymer
electronic circuits introduces a new design approach to de-
veloping non-traditional imaging systems that can provide
an increased ﬁeld-of-view, enhanced focusing capabilities,
and enlarged sensing area [23]. Mechanically ﬂexible plastic
substrates are particularly attractive because they enable the
construction of sensing arrays that can be rolled up or folded
when not in operation [24], or fastened onto non-planar rigid
surfaces using an adhesive. One of the key features of the core
technology is that the conductive patterned sensor array can be
printed, or etched, on a ﬂat polymer sheet and then excess sub-
strate material can removed through a simple micromachining
process to increase overall mechanical ﬂexibility.
To create this new class of imaging technology, purple
membrane patches of bR are deposited directly onto a poly-
ethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate coated with a patterned
conductive layer. The design of the spatial pattern and size of
individual pixels can be modiﬁed prior to printing the conduc-
tive electrodes onto a sheet of PET plastic. The minimum pixel
size can approach the nanometer range because the smallest
sensing element could, theoretically, be one single bR mole-
cule. However, from a practical perspective, the pixel size is
limited by the ampliﬁcation and noise suppression capabilities
of the readout electronics. Future advances in carbon nanotube
electronics may address some of these technological limitations
and enable the full miniaturization of mechanically ﬂexible
imaging technology.
The ﬂexible imaging technology provides new opportunities
for developing robust effective solutions. One application under
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 7 ---
WANG* et al.: BIOELECTRONIC IMAGING ARRAY BASED ON BACTERIORHODOPSIN FILM
255
Fig. 12. Schematic diagram of a hemispherical imaging system based on a non-
planar bR array.
current consideration by the authors is a wide ﬁeld-of-view
(FOV) imaging system for on-line monitoring and surveillance.
To increase the ﬁeld-of-view (FOV) or enable omni-directional
imaging it is necessary to incorporate bulky reﬂecting surfaces
and wide-angle lens assemblies. These optical systems are
often prone to alignment errors, vibrations and thereby difﬁcult
to calibrate for ﬁeld applications. Fig. 12 illustrates a novel
hemispherical imaging system that exploits the photoelectric
characteristics of dried bacteriorhodopsin (bR) thin ﬁlms,
mechanical ﬂexibility of printed electronic circuits on plastic
substrates, and bendable polymer micro lens. Each microlens
corresponds to a cluster of bR pixels that are arranged in the
predeﬁned pattern. The bR imaging array is fabricated on a
ﬂexible PET sheet, and excess substrate and microlens material
is removed by laser micromachining to allow the array to
be wrapped on a rigid hemispherical support structure. This
sandwich conﬁguration creates a compact lens-sensor assembly
that mimics the structure of an apposition compound eye found
in many insects. The wide FOV is achieved by combining the
image segments captured by all individual lens-sensor units.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper illustrates a new approach to the development of a
biologically inspired photoreceptor array by integrating bR ﬁlm
with ﬂexible transparent-electrode technology. The bR material
is a stable photosensitive protein that has a promising future in
designing and developing artiﬁcial vision applications. Exper-
iments and simulations are conducted in this work to demon-
strate the applicability of bR to practical vision applications. A
4
4 prototype array is constructed on a ﬂexible ITO-coated
PET substrate, where the photoreceptors are 2
2 mm and sep-
arated by a 3 mm pitch. Array performance is characterized ex-
perimentally in terms of signal-to-noise ratio, dynamic range,
spectral response, interpixel uniformity and ﬂexibility. Exper-
imental ﬁndings indicate that the photoelectric response of an
individual pixel is approximately linear over the light power
range of 200
W to 12 mW. Uniformity of the photoresponse
among all pixels is greater than 71% of the average value, 465.25
mV/mW.
A demonstration of bR’s vision capabilities is provided by
integrating the prototype array into a visual motion detection
system. Reichardt’s delay-and-correlate algorithm is chosen
due to its simplicity and compatibility with bR’s differential re-
sponse. The combination of motion model and material exploits
a synergy in that the bR ﬁlm performs the temporal ﬁltering that
is necessary for the model implementation. Thus, a bR-based
motion detector simpliﬁes the system circuitry, as most other
implementations require additional components to achieve this
function. Accurate real time motion estimation is achieved
for velocities ranging from 20 mm/s to 80 mm/s. The direct
deposit of photosensitive biomaterials onto low-cost ﬂexible
polymer electronic circuits introduces a new design approach
to developing non-planar imaging systems that can provide an
increased ﬁeld-of-view, enhanced focusing capabilities, and
enlarged sensing area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by research grants to Profs. A.
S. Bassi and G. K. Knopf from the Natural Sciences and En-
gineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canada
Foundation for Innovation (CFI), and Photonics Research On-
tario (PRO).
REFERENCES
[1] C. Koch and H. Li, Vision Chips: Implementing Vision Algorithms with
Analog VLSI Circuits.
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Computer Press, 1995.
[2] R. Etienne-Cummings, J. Van der Spiegel, P. Mueller, and M. Z.
Zhang, “A foveated silicon retina for two-dimensional tracking,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Analog Digit. Signal Process., vol. 47, no. 6,
pp. 504–517, June 2000.
[3] E. Ozalevli and C. M. Higgins, “Reconﬁgurable biologically inspired
visual motion systems using modular neuromorphic VLSI chips,” IEEE
Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Fundam. Theory Appl., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 79–92,
Jan. 2005.
[4] D. Oesterhelt and W. Stoeckenius, “Rhodopsin-like protein from the
purple membrane of Halbacterium,” Nature, vol. 233, no. 39, pp.
149–152, 1971.
[5] R. Henderson, J. M. Baldwin, T. A. Ceska, F. Zemlin, E. Beckmann,
and K. H. Downing, “Model for the structure of bacteriorhodopsin
based on high-resolution electron cryomicroscopy,” J. Mol. Biol., vol.
213, pp. 899–929, 1990.
[6] J. K. Lanyi, “Understanding structure and function in the light-driven
proton pump bacteriorhodopsin,” J. Struct. Biol., vol. 124, pp. 164–178,
1998.
[7] N. Hampp, “Bacteriorhodopsin as a photochromic retinal protein for
optical memories,” Chem. Rev., vol. 100, no. 5, pp. 1755–1776, 2000.
[8] Y. Shen, C. R. Saﬁnya, K. Liang, A. Ruppert, and K. Rothschild, “Sta-
bilization of the membrane-protein bacteriorhodopsin to 140 C in 2-di-
mensional ﬁlms,” Nature, vol. 366, no. 39, pp. 48–50, 1993.
[9] W. W. Wang, G. K. Knopf, and A. S. Bassi, “Photoelectric properties
of a detector based on dried bacteriorhodopsin ﬁlm,” Biosens. Bioelec-
tron., vol. 21, pp. 1309–1319, 2005.
[10] H. Takei, A. Lewis, G. P. Chen, and I. Nebenzahl, “Implementing re-
ceptive ﬁelds with excitatory and inhibitory optoelectrical responses of
bacteriorhodopsin ﬁlms,” Applied Optics, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 500–509,
1991.
[11] J. Yang and G. Wang, “Image edge detecting by using the bacteri-
orhodopsin-based artiﬁcial ganglion cell receptive ﬁeld,” Thin Solid
Films, vol. 324, pp. 281–284, 1998.
[12] D. Haronian and A. Lewis, “Microfabricating bacteriohodopsin ﬁlms
for imaging and computing,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 61, no. 18, pp.
2237–2239, 1998.
[13] T. Miyasaka and K. Koyama, “Image sensing and processing by a bac-
teriorhodopsin-based artiﬁcial photodetector,” Appl. Opt., vol. 32, no.
31, pp. 6371–6379, 1993.
[14] K. Fukuzawa, “Motion-sensitive position sensor using bacteri-
orhodopsin,” Appl. Opt., vol. 33, no. 31, pp. 7489–7495, 1994.
[15] J. Min, H. G. Choi, J. W. Choi, and W. H. Lee, “Optimal fabrication
condition of bacteriorhodopsin ﬁlms by electrophoretic sedimentation
technique,” Supramol. Sci., vol. 5, pp. 687–690, 1998.
[16] M. Frydrych, P. Silfsten, S. Parkkinen, J. Parkkinen, and T. Jaaske-
lainen, “Color sensitive retina based on bacteriorhodopsin,” Biosys-
tems, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 131–140, 2000.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


--- Page 8 ---
256
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NANOBIOSCIENCE, VOL. 7, NO. 4, DECEMBER 2008
[17] H. G. Choi, W. C. Jung, J. Min, W. H. Lee, and J. W. Choi,
“Color image detection by biomolecular photodetector using bacteri-
orhodopsin-based complex LB ﬁlms,” Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 16,
pp. 925–935, 2001.
[18] U. Alexiev, T. Marti, M. P. Heyn, H. G. Khorana, and P. Scherrer,
“Surface charge of bacteriorhodopsin detected with covalently bound
pH-indicators at selected extracellular and cytoplasmic sites,” Bio-
chemistry, vol. 33, pp. 298–306, 1994.
[19] W. W. Wang, G. K. Knopf, and A. S. Bassi, “Time and frequency
response characteristics of bacteriorhodopsin-based photodetectors,”
Opt. Eng., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 084001-1–084001-9, 2006.
[20] W. W. Wang, G. K. Knopf, and A. S. Bassi, “Implementation of
bidirectional motion detection using protein based photoreceptors,” in
IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron., Monterey, CA, 2005,
pp. 72–75.
[21] W. Reichadt, , W. A. Rosenblith, Ed., “Autocorrelation: A principle
for the evaluation sensory information by the central nervous system,”
in Sensory Communication.
New York: Wiley, 1961, pp. 303–317.
[22] J. Kramer, R. Sarpeshkar, and D. Koch, “Pulse-based analog VLSI
velocity sensors,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Analog Digit. Signal
Process., vol. 44, pp. 86–101, Feb. 1997.
[23] R. H. Reuss et al., “Macroelectronics: Perspective on technology and
applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 93, no. 7, pp. 1239–1256, 2005.
[24] J. M. Xu, “Plastic electronics and future trends in microelectronics,”
Synth. Met., vol. 115, pp. 1–3, 2000.
Wei Wei Wang received the B.S. degree in mecha-
tronics from Shenyang University of Technology,
Shenyang, Liaoning, China, in 1993, the M.S.
degree in mechanical engineering from Northeastern
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China, in 1997, and
Ph.D. degree in mechanical & materials engineering
from the University of Western Ontario, London,
Ontario, Canada, in 2006.
She was a postdoctoral fellow with Dr. Knopf at
the University of Western Ontario from September
2006 to August 2007, where she ﬁled an U.S.
patent and a Canadian patent for ﬂexible bacteriorhodopsin imaging arrays
based on her doctoral work. Then she joined the Department of Physics &
Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada, as a Postdoctoral
Fellow in September 2007 until present, where she works towards developing
a new confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscope that will be used to explore the
earliest cellular changes in the diabetic retina. Her research interests include
biosensor development, biosignal acquisition and processing, artiﬁcial vision
system design and integration, as well as medical imaging instrumentation
development.
George K. Knopf is a Professor in the Department
of Mechanical & Materials Engineering at the Uni-
versity of Western Ontario. His research activities
involve bioelectronics, optical sensors and actuators,
adaptive geometric
modeling, intelligent CAD,
and interactive data visualization. This research
has resulted in the development of several inno-
vative shape reconstruction algorithms and optical
sensing technologies including an unconstrained
range-sensor head and a mechanically ﬂexible
bR-based imaging arras. He has recently co-edited
a CRC Press volume entitled Smart Biosensor Technology and several SPIE
Proceedings on Optomechatronics Systems. Prof. Knopf has acted as a technical
reviewer for numerous academic journals, conferences, and granting agencies
and has co-chaired several international conferences.
Amarjeet Bassi is Professor of Chemical and
Biochemical
Engineering
and
Associate
Dean
(Academic) in the Faculty of Engineering at the
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada. He received his B.Tech. in chemical en-
gineering from the BHU—Institute of Technology,
Varanasi, India in 1980; an M.E.Sc. from the Uni-
versity of Saskatchewan in 1989 and a Ph.D. from
Western Ontario in 1993. He was a Visiting Assistant
Professor at the University of California, Riverside
from 1993 to 1994. Dr. Bassi’s research interests are
in environmental biosensor design, bio-separations and green catalysis. His
ﬁelds of expertise include biosensors and nano sensors, and enzymes in green
processing. He has authored over 80 refereed research papers and refereed
proceedings, co-edited a book, Smart Biosensor Technology, several book
chapters, and holds two patents on his recent work. He is an Associate Editor
for the Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering and a Guest Editor for the
Asia-Paciﬁc Journal of Chemical Engineering. He has also acted as a technical
reviewer for numerous refereed journals, grants and scholarships and also in
organization of conferences.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Michael Sedbon. Downloaded on July 25,2025 at 15:04:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
