--- Page 1 ---
Article
Electro-active polymer hydrogels exhibit
emergent memory when embodied in a
simulated game environment
Strong et al. demonstrate the application of ionic electro-active polymer hydrogels
to computational tasks through use of a multi-electrode array integrated with a
simulated Pong environment, taking advantage of the unique memory mechanics
present in many active mediums. Improved performance is shown within the task
as environmental memory is acquired.
Vincent Strong, William
Holderbaum, Yoshikatsu
Hayashi
y.hayashi@reading.ac.uk
Highlights
EAP gel memory mechanics are
demonstrated via ion
concentration measurements
A hybrid EAP gel control system is
integrated into a simulated Pong
environment
The system shows improved
performance over time,
supported by control experiments
This demonstrates the application
of alternate active medium to
computational tasks
Strong et al., Cell Reports Physical Science 5,
102151
September 18, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102151
ll
OPEN ACCESS


--- Page 2 ---
Article
Electro-active polymer hydrogels exhibit
emergent memory when embodied
in a simulated game environment
Vincent Strong,1 William Holderbaum,1 and Yoshikatsu Hayashi1,2,*
SUMMARY
The goal of artiﬁcial neural networks is to utilize the functions of
biological brains to develop computational algorithms. However,
these purely artiﬁcial implementations cannot achieve the adaptive
behavior found in biological neural networks (BNNs) via their
inherent memory. Alternative computing mediums that integrate
biological neurons with computer hardware have shown similar
emergent behavior via memory, as found in BNNs. By applying cur-
rent theories in BNNs, can emergent memory functions be achieved
with alternative mediums? Electro-active polymer (EAP) hydrogels
were embedded in the simulated game-world of Pong via custom
multi-electrode arrays and feedback between motor commands
and stimulation. Through performance analysis within the game
environment, emergent memory acquisition was demonstrated,
driven by ion migration through the hydrogels.
INTRODUCTION
Emergent computing is a ﬁeld inspired by the computation that takes place throughout
nature and is described as highly complex processes arising from the cooperation of
many simple processes1 or when the behavior of a system does not depend on its indi-
vidual parts but on their relationships to one another.2 Artiﬁcial neural networks were
developed based on the emergent computing behavior of biological brains. Both are
large complex systems composed of simple machines whose combined interactions
lead to complex computation or thought. The expansion of these theories led to reser-
voir computing and the application of physical non-linear systems, called reservoirs, as
part of the computation process. By using reservoirs found in nature, reservoir
computing techniques allowed the emergent computation of nature to be utilized in
practical applications; for example, with water ripples for image analysis,3,4 mycelium
mold as maze solvers,5 and chemical reactors as logic gates.6,7 These systems solve
calculation tasks and often provide unexpected solutions. However, they do not exhibit
emergent memory and, by association learning, behavior observed within biological
neural networks (BNNs). With limited memory, a reservoir system’s capability to
improve is limited. This would mean that continuous tasks, requiring behavior based
on task history, are too complex for a reservoir to yield any useful result. However,
not all possible reservoir mediums behave in this way. With the correct combination
of task and computational medium, can emergent memory functions, similar to those
observed in BNNs, be achieved? Furthermore, would this allow more complex and
nuanced tasks to be pursued through reservoir computing techniques?
To harness the computational power of BNNs, for calculation problems, the ﬁeld of
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) was developed. ANNs were created through the
1Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Biomedical Engineering, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Reading, Reading,
Berkshire RG6 7BE, UK
2Lead contact
*Correspondence: y.hayashi@reading.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.2024.102151
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1
ll
OPEN ACCESS


--- Page 3 ---
application of structural elements from biological brains, with the goal of achieving
similar learning capabilities. ANNs have made great strides in solving problems via
machine learning that were previously thought to be impossible via computers.
However, these solutions are limited by hardware implementation;8,9 as approxima-
tions of BNNs, ANNs are not capable of the learning found in their biological inspi-
ration. Learning behavior, in biological systems, is dependent on the ability of a sys-
tem to remember the outcomes and consequences of previous iterations within
a task.
To better understand how the interactions of biological neurons allow for such com-
plex and useful behavior, theories of morphological and embodied cognition were
employed,10,11 both exploring the integration of computing behavior with the phys-
ical ‘‘hardware.’’12 Embodied cognition theorizes that a body’s environmental inter-
actions constitute or contribute to cognition, meaning that memory and learning
behavior results from the method of information acquisition, thus resulting from
its physical structure.13 Both theories contribute to the idea that, to achieve the
behavior of BNNs in ANNs, hardware capable of the complex interactions present
in BNNs is needed. The concept of ANN implementation outside of digital hardware
led to the development of reservoir computing.
Reservoir computing derives from recurrent neural network frameworks. The dy-
namics of a ﬁxed non-linear system, called a reservoir, are used as part of a neural
network, mapping input and output signals to higher dimensional space.14 Reser-
voirs are typically physical systems exhibiting complex behavior used to encode
data, embodying computation not possible within a typical ANN structure. Reservoir
computer structures consist of three main layers: an excitation layer, reservoir, and
readout layer. The excitation layer encodes network input into reservoir stimulation.
The readout layer interprets reservoir responses into usable data, using weights to
allow performance tuning and optimization. The reservoir can be any kind of me-
dium that encodes temporal problems into higher dimensions, creating recurrent
connections in data.15
A promising application of reservoir computing to achieve biological computa-
tional capabilities is through biological neurons themselves.16 Integration of
neuron cultures and electronic interfaces produces computational devices17
referred to as organic or ‘‘wetware’’ computers. By stimulating BNNs with encoded
task information, neurons will form pathways in response. This leads to a complex
integration of memory in computation via neural plasticity.18 Wetware computers
are usually implemented through control of network plasticity, achieved via appli-
cation of patterned or random stimulation.19 By controlling plasticity, the rate of
network reorganization is controlled. A feedback loop is implemented where the
network is ‘‘punished’’ by increasing plasticity or ‘‘rewarded’’ by reducing plas-
ticity,19,20 directly inﬂuencing what stimulus is incorporated into memory. Imple-
mentations of this technology include simulated ﬂight control21 and the arcade
game Pong.22
In a previous study,22 a hybrid BNN-computer system was developed. Using this
hybrid system, a grown culture of neurons is trained to play the game Pong in a vir-
tual environment. The game environment is encoded into BNN stimulation with re-
gions designated for ball position sensing and paddle motor commands. Using rally
lengths, maximum score before a miss, as the performance metric with a closed loop
that manages neural plasticity, the BNN (referred to as DishBrain) improved in ability
while playing the game.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 4 ---
In the hybrid BNN-computer system,22 supervised learning techniques were used to
train the BNN memory for a given purpose. Using random or patterned neural stim-
ulation as punishment or reward, respectively, controls neural plasticity. This method
of controlled plasticity is derived from theories of emergent intelligent behavior in
biological brains via the free energy principle (FEP).23–25
Theories of FEP generally present in BNNs through self-organization of synaptic
pathways via active inference,23,26 although there are many complex layered sys-
tems within the brain that can be inﬂuenced by theories of FEP. Active inference
as a theory holds that the internal structure of the medium represents information
about the environment, acting as a form of ‘‘memory.’’23,27,28 Due to the variable na-
ture of such media, the information is not stored as a one-to-one comparison but as
an encoded and pseudo-representative structure. The ‘‘memory’’ continually
updates its structure as information is received. As sensed inputs, different from
those represented via the structure, are received, free energy increases. The system
seeks to reduce free energy by the most direct means. This presents as self-organi-
zation and restructuring of the medium.29,30
Since the initial theories presented through the DishBrain studies,22 other concepts
have come to expand on the role of free energy and self-organization within systems
of memory, both in and outside of biology. The most impactful so far is that of
criticality.31
Dynamic criticality consists of many ideas applied on the basis that the medium, such
as a BNN, is a type of excitable, or active, medium and, in a broader sense, a dissi-
pative dynamical system. To brieﬂy summarize, theories of criticality posit that these
systems, when provided with energy, evolve into a ‘‘critical state’’ in which interac-
tions are no longer subject to characteristic time or length scales,32,33 effectively
bridging the gap between local and global scales of interaction. This loss of scale
presents spatially as self-reorganization, resulting in the emergence of scale-
invariant, or fractal, structures33–35 representative of the method in which the energy
was provided. The co-dependency of FEP and criticality36 was further expanded on
in work by Isomura et al.36 In this study, BNN cultures were trained on mixed sensory
input from two sources. Through reverse engineering techniques, they were able to
predict the reorganization of the BNN through the minimization of variational free
energy, as the sensory input was encoded into the structure or ‘‘memory.’’
However, BNNs are not the only medium that presents restructuring behavior that
could be conceptualized via theories of free energy for the purpose of computation.
Many active-matter materials also display these mechanics.37 Ionic electro-active
polymer (EAP) hydrogels are active materials also governed by these principles,
with ions migrating under the inﬂuence of electric ﬁelds to reduce system free en-
ergy,38 reorganizing the ion distribution to adapt to the temporal and spatial pattern
of electric stimulation.
Ionic EAP hydrogels are active-matter materials39 showing promise in soft robotics
as actuators.40 Recent studies have shown the potential for these materials to be
used in computation,41 given an appropriate application and framework. This mate-
rial changes shape in response to electric stimulation, with ions acting as active
agents. The dynamics of these active particles have shown memory-like behavior.42
Electric stimulation increases free energy, which, via ion migration, the EAP seeks to
minimize.38 This migration causes a restructuring of the EAP’s distribution of ions
and charged polymer chains. The method of information encoding via ion migration
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
3
Article


--- Page 5 ---
is comparable to the role of ions within the neurons of the BNN, where the inhomo-
geneous distribution of ions appears as a common driving mechanic.
Therefore, if the EAP’s electric stimulation was representative of an environment, then
would the reorganization of ions be representative of that environment, similar to the
structure of BNNs within the brain? Furthermore, if both ionic EAPs and BNNs exhibit
memory behavior, then is it possible that EAPs, like BNNS, can exhibit improved motor
performance via memory if applied to an established BNN task such as Pong?
In summary, there are many computation techniques that are being developed rapidly
to achieve the kind of emergent memory behavior found in BNNs. Theories in
embodied computation have led to developments in ANNs, allowing physical media
with complex behaviors to be used as computational resources.14 Through reservoir
computing, BNNs were integrated into computational tasks using fundamental the-
ories of free energy14,22 that were then expanded on through theories of criticality.31,36
This study aims to show how EAP hydrogels can exhibit emergent memory func-
tions when embodied in a simulated game environment. First, by measuring ion
concentrations through conductivity of the EAP hydrogel after periods of electric
stimulation, the memory mechanics of the ionic EAP hydrogel were studied. Sec-
ond, the EAP hydrogel was embodied in the simulated game environment of
Pong through a custom multi-electrode array (MEA). The game Pong was used
as an established task for this study via current work in wetware computers.22
The game environment was encoded into stimulations provided to the hydrogel,
and recorded ion concentrations were used as motor commands. Multiple game
‘‘runs’’ were conducted with this setup, with game performance over time recorded
and analyzed in order to determine the effectiveness of the system’s ‘‘memory’’
within the task.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Memory mechanics through ion migration and conductivity measurement
For a medium to be used in computation, it must exhibit behaviors representative of
properties key to the computational system; the most fundamental of this is memory.
Polyacrylamide hydrogel is an ionic EAP that displays mechanics that can be inter-
preted as a form of computational memory.
Polyacrylamide hydrogel is an active-matter EAP;38 hydrogen ions act as active
agents within the hydrogel, inﬂuenced by the polymer network and each other. Stim-
ulation by an electric ﬁeld causes an increase in free energy within the hydrogel, and
the ions migrate43 to minimize the free energy of the system.38 As the ions move,
they drag water molecules, causing changes in water distribution and localized
deformation of the gel, driven by an equilibrium between osmotic pressure44 and
rubber elasticity45 in the polymer network. Given a constant migration of ions into
a location, the localized rate of swelling gradually decreases, further decreasing
free energy. This creates a hysteresis effect46 that leads to complex dynamics in
the gel’s reactions to stimulation.
The hydrogen ions take relatively little time to migrate under stimulation by an elec-
tric ﬁeld but take considerably longer to diffuse to a homogeneous distribution un-
der no stimulation. The difference in timescale allows previous stimulations to affect
future stimulations, as the ion distributions persist between stimulations, leading to
a form of memory.42,47
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 6 ---
This experiment is designed to demonstrate this initial memory mechanic and detail
the underlining methodology that is used in the subsequent experiment presented
in this study regarding the impact of said memory. By recording the ion concentra-
tions before and after consecutive stimulations, the ‘‘remembered’’ state caused by
the stimulation can be observed. Ion concentration can be measured through the
conductivity of the gel. As ions collect in a location and ionic concentration in-
creases, the local conductivity also increases.48 By applying a small voltage to said
location, the electric current draw on the power supply is directly proportional to
the conductivity and, thus, directly proportional to the ion concentration. By utilizing
two adjacent pairs of electrodes, stimulation can be applied while conductivity is
measured simultaneously. This setup is illustrated in Figure 1.
To better understand hydrogel EAP system behavior, as shown in Figure 1, the basic
mechanisms can be described through Frick’s ﬁrst law of particle diffusion,49 charac-
terizing diffusive ﬂux J over a free energy gradient du, shown in Equation 1. There are
three main components to the free energy u of ions within the hydrogel system,
shown in Equation 2:
(1) energy due to the electric ﬁeld imposed by the electrode pair ue,
(2) energy imposed by the changing chemical concentration gradient within the
hydrogel as ions migrate uc, and
(3) energy due to the electrical potential gradient of ions within the hydrogel as
ions migrate up.
ue and uc + up (electrochemical gradient) oppose each other. As the electric ﬁeld at-
tracts ions to a location, the local concentration and potential increase, causing an
increase in free energy opposing that of the electric ﬁeld:
J = D
RT
du
dx
(Equation 1)
Figure 1. Ion motion under electric stimulation
Diagrams show how ion motion is inﬂuenced by external stimulation via an electric ﬁeld and
recorded via electric current draw. Under stimulation, ions will gather between the electrode pair
from elsewhere in the EAP gel. As the concentration of ions in this location increases, the
conductivity also increases; the increase in conductivity can be measured as an increase in electric
current draw when a small voltage is applied in parallel close to this location via a secondary
electrode pair.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
5
Article


--- Page 7 ---
where
du = ue + uc + up
(Equation 2)
ue = ke
veAe
dr
(Equation 3)
uc = RT ln
m2
m1

(Equation 4)
up = ZFðv1  v2Þ
(Equation 5)
ue can be represented via Coulomb’s law and electric potential energy, shown in
Equation 3. Ion charge is equal to electron charge; the charge imposed by the
electrode pair is derived from the capacitance of the electrodes surrounding the
hydrogel. uc can be derived from the Gibbs free energy representation of thermody-
namic entropy as the ratio between concentration increases,50 shown in Equation 4.
up is represented via the Gibbs free energy derivation of cell potential as the com-
bined charge of ions becomes inhomogeneous,50 shown in Equation 5.
Due to Coulomb’s law, as the ions approach the charged electrode pair, u increases,
resulting in a larger ﬂux J. However, uc + up also increases opposing the electric ﬁeld.
These two opposing forces change at very different rates, with the difference in
magnitude being a key factor of the hysteresis component. As the ions migrate un-
der the inﬂuence of the electric ﬁeld, eventually the u is minimized as the opposing
factors balance. This interpretation is, however, a simpliﬁcation. In actuality, there
are many additional free energy components that contribute to the complexity of
the hydrogel’s EAP behavior, such as terms associated with the deformation of
the gel’s polymer structure as it swells due to local ion and water concentrations.
These additional terms also inﬂuence factors of other terms, such as diffusion coef-
ﬁcients and permittivity of the hydrogel material, resulting in extremely complex
behavior as the free energy is minimized.
Experimental approach
Using these concepts, a series of stimulations were applied to a polyacrylamide
hydrogel sample to demonstrate the memory mechanism. Polyacrylamide is a rela-
tively simple EAP hydrogel to synthesize,51 allowing for it to be produced in large
batches and molded in many different ways for the required experiments. The
gels were synthesized using the methodology described in the supplemental exper-
imental procedures under ‘‘Gel synthesis procedure.’’ The gel was left in a sodium
chloride solution (0:08%) to allow the ion concentrations to stabilize and provide a
consistent starting water concentration within the hydrogel. The gel was then placed
between two electrode pairs spaced with a 7 mm gap between them. A constant
sensing voltage of 2 V was applied to one electrode pair, using an electric current
sensor to record the response, while a series of 20 V stimulations, across the thick-
ness of the hydrogel (8.5 mm), was applied to the second electrode pair. Both volt-
ages were applied with the same polarity.
Temperature and water content within the hydrogel can affect free energy equilib-
rium.38 Temperature alters the elastic properties and rate of ionic motion.51 As
the osmotic pressure difference between the polymer networks and ionic solution
drives the swelling, changes in the hydrogel’s water content change the degree to
which it can swell, as well as altering the mechanical properties of the material.52
Because of this, temperature and water content must be controlled. To mitigate
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 8 ---
this as much as possible, the water was taken from a temperature-controlled source
(approximately 22C) to ensure that the solution was at a consistent temperature and
provide the same starting temperature conditions. Furthermore, the gels were
stored in watertight containers and left in the ionic solution for the same period of
time to ensure the water content of the hydrogel was consistent.
Findings
The results of this demonstration can be seen in Figure 2. The recorded electric cur-
rent had a default value of approximately 0.8 mA as the EAP hydrogel was inherently
conductive, as shown in segment A. With application of an electric ﬁeld, there is an
immediate rise to 2 mA as the ﬁeld is picked up by the sensing electrode pair shown
at the beginning of segment B. The stimulation also caused an increase in free en-
ergy. As a result, the ions moved toward the electrode pair to minimize free energy.
The electric current draw rose, as ions collect and conductivity rose, to 2.4 mA, as
shown in segment B. Once the stimulation was removed, the electric current drop-
ped back to default values, as shown in segment C. Once the stimulation was reap-
plied, the electric current draw immediately rose back to the point where segment B
ended, as the ions still maintained their positions, as shown at the start of segment D.
This observed behavior exhibits a memory-like mechanism where a value is ‘‘saved’’
to the EAP hydrogel by the redistribution of ions within the gel. This behavior can
then be seen again at the beginning of segment F, where it continues from where
segment D ﬁnished.
Figure 2. Electric current draw over time with select stimulation
Shown is a sample of a recorded electric current draw from 2 adjacent parallel electrodes as
described in Figure 1. The data are segmented and labeled A–G for reference. The sensing voltage
(2 V) was applied continually through the entire demonstration, and stimulation (20 V across the 8.5-
mm-thick hydrogel) was applied in sections B, D, and F. The recorded electric current has a default
value of approximately 0.8 mA, as the EAP gel is inherently conductive, as shown in segment A. With
application of an electric ﬁeld, there is an immediate rise to 2 mA as the ﬁeld is picked up by the
sensing electrode pair shown at the beginning of segment B.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
7
Article


--- Page 9 ---
Interpretation
From this demonstration of memory mechanics, it is evident that changes in the ion
distribution and polymer network can be recorded as electric current draw through
the application of small voltages. This is evidenced by the change in electric current
over time as stimulation is applied, altering the ion distribution and polymer
network. The demonstration also highlights how the increase in free energy through
stimulation was resolved by the hydrogel through ion migration and the last state of
the EAP hydrogel ‘‘remembered’’ after the electric stimulation was removed. With
reapplication of the stimulation, the changing electric current continued from the
last state recorded during stimulation. From these observations, it can be estab-
lished that a form of memory is present in the EAP hydrogel, and the response
due to the hydrogel’s memory can be measured in parallel with the application of
stimuli. To fully demonstrate this memory mechanism and its value within computa-
tion, a suitable activity was required, along with a closed-loop control structure and
hardware to interface with the hydrogel.
EAP hydrogel embodied in a simulated game world
The memory-like behaviors of the EAP hydrogel can be characterized through free en-
ergy minimization.38 There are many systems whose mechanics can be represented
through free energy minimization; in computation, one of the most signiﬁcant is that
of BNNs.23 Furthermore, in the most basic sense, biological brains represent informa-
tion through the self-organization of neurons as active agents.53 Similarly, EAP hydro-
gels can represent information via the distribution and organization of ions as active
agents. Information in BNNS is also stored through many other complex means; how-
ever, the organization of neurons serves as a leading mechanism within the BNN sys-
tem. To accurately demonstrate the memory mechanics within a task, the EAP hydrogel
must be embodied within a closedcontrol loop, as is present in BNN systems.To induce
emergent memory functions, the hydrogel must be able to inﬂuence actions within an
environment. The change in environment as a result of those actions must feed back to
the hydrogel, leading to changes in actions and memory behavior. To construct this
closed loop and quantify the effect of memory, a suitable activity is required.
A previous study22 used a single-player version of the game Pong as the quantifying ac-
tivity when integrating a BNN with computer architecture. The game provided a virtual
environment for the BNN to inhabit and from which to acquire information. The method
used to interface the biological neurons with the simulated environment ﬁts neatly with
the reservoir computing framework.14 In the study,22 the position of the ball was pre-
sented to the neurons through localized stimulation, aligning with the function of the
excitation layer in a reservoir computer. The neuron responses were converted to motor
commands to control the paddle, aligning with the function of the readout layer.
A common driving mechanism between both BNNs and EAP hydrogels is the migra-
tion of ions in reaction to stimuli, creating an inhomogeneous distribution of ions
throughout the media. Ion migration can encode information provided via stimula-
tion in the sensory-motor loop. As shown in previous work, the resulting inhomoge-
neous distribution of ions can present as a memory function of previous stimuli.41
Utilizing a reservoir computing framework, performance of the computational ability
within the EAP hydrogel can be assessed using the Pong game-based activity in a
simulated game environment.
Experimental approach
An MEA was used to interface the EAP hydrogel with a computer system containing
the Pong game environment. The array of electrodes was divided into two regions,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 10 ---
used to provide a stimulus as input to the gel via the application of electric ﬁelds at
select locations and record output via the electric current at select locations. This di-
vision of regions is similar to how MEAs are currently used in applications.22,54 By
dividing areas into speciﬁc tasks, interference from different tasks happening in
the same location is minimized. The layout of these regions can be seen in Figure 3A.
The stimulation region of the gel acts as the stimulation layer of the reservoir frame-
work, consisting of a 2 3 3 array. To translate the ball’s position into stimulations, the
game environment was divided into a 2 3 3 grid, as shown in Figure 4B. The location
of the ball in the game environment is sent from the computer to the MEA; as the ball
passes through those regions, the corresponding electrode pair is activated to stim-
ulate that area. The regions as they are labeled in black in Figure 4B are how they will
be referenced throughout this paper.
The sensing region acts as the readout layer of the reservoir framework. Electric cur-
rent sensors were used to measure the electric current draw at the sensing elec-
trodes, utilizing the small sensing voltage (2 V) deﬁned in the previous experiment.
These electric current values are recorded on screen, shown in Figure 4A, recorded
in milliamperes, and interpreted into motor commands for the paddle. Recorded
electric current values are normalized using the maximum and minimum electric cur-
rent values recorded from the hydrogel during the previous experimentation with
the apparatus, found to be +3 mA and 0.75 mA, respectively. A trend is then calcu-
lated using these normalized values against their locations represented in the Pong
Figure 3. System layout of closed-loop communication between the computer containing the
Pong environment and the EAP hydrogel
(A) The layout of communication between components in the system and separation of the
electrodes into regions. The electrodes are divided into driving, which provide stimulation, and
sensing, which measure electric current draw. The driving electrodes are driven by relays that direct
the electric ﬁeld (20 V across the 10-mm-thick hydrogel disk). The sensing electrodes provide a
small voltage (2 V), and the electric current draw is measured by an electric current sensor. Both
relays and sensors are coordinated by a microcontroller, which, in turn, is directed by the computer
and Pong game environment. A more detailed circuitry schematic can also be found in Figure S1.
Additionally, an image of the physical hardware can be seen in Figure S2.
(B) A ﬂowchart of the information path from the Pong environment on the computer to the hydrogel
containing the ions.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
9
Article


--- Page 11 ---
game environment. The trend is generated by ﬁtting a second-degree polynomial to
the 3 points. The peak of this trend is the predicted point of highest electric current
and highest ion concentration in the gel and is where the paddle is placed. This is
illustrated in the example in Figure 4C.
Through this layout of hardware and software, a closed loop was established, where
the computer outputs the game’s environment, represented as ball location, to the
MEA applied to the gel as shaped electric ﬁelds. In response, the ion concentrations
are measured by the MEA as electric current and provided to the computer and the
Pong game to move the paddle. This closed loop is outlined in Figure 3B. A more
detailed description of the behavior and implementation of the Pong game, as
shown in Figure 4, can be found in Note S1. Similarly, a more detailed description
of the hardware implementation, as shown in Figure 3A, can be found in Note S2.
A circuitry schematic and image of the physical hardware can be found in
Figures S1 and S2. The full setup of the computer game environment and MEA appa-
ratus can be seen in Figure S3. The full experimental procedure for each run of the
Pong game with the EAP hydrogel can be found in the supplemental experimental
procedures under ‘‘Pong Game Experimental Procedure.’’ In total 21, separate
EAP hydrogel runs were carried out, collecting 3,500 s of ‘‘gameplay’’ for each run
before the hydrogel degraded beyond the point of continuing.
From these games, several metrics were recorded to be used in performance ana-
lyses, such as electric current measurements, stimulation positions, and score. The
score, shown in Figure 4B, increases whenever the paddle successfully hits the ball
Figure 4. Software representation of the Pong game within the computer
(A) The electric current sensor readings as they are received by the computer. The black, brown, and red lines represent the top, middle, and bottom
sensors, respectively. The interval between received data is also measured and averages 0.5 mS, labeled as ‘‘Plot Interval.’’ The averaged electric
current across the graph for each sensor is measured for the purposes of establishing default values, labeled as ‘‘Bk,’’ ‘‘Br,’’ and ‘‘Rd.’’ The total
recording time is also displayed, labeled as ‘‘Time.’’ These sensor values move the paddle in the Pong game environment through conversion to a
position based on sensor location, as visualized in (C). This can be seen on the computer screen, along with the apparatus shown in Figure S3.
(B) The simulated Pong game environment, 1,000 3 1,000 pixels, which is separated into 6 regions as described in Figure 3B. When the ball is in a region,
it will darken, and the corresponding electrode pair will stimulate the EAP hydrogel. The score is displayed at the top and resets when the ball hits the
left wall behind the paddle. The regions are also labeled in black here for reference within this paper. The paddle is set to 1/3 the environment height
(333 pixels). The rearrangement of regions used for the control dataset, where ‘‘vision’’ is impaired, is indicated by the red labels. This can be seen on the
computer screen, along with the apparatus shown in Figure S3.
(C) An example of the method used to place the paddle based on the electric current readings as measured in (A), shown here as the same
representative colors and labeled with their region locations. The electric current readings are normalized between 0 and 1 and plotted based on their
region’s center vertical location. A second-degree polynomial is applied, as indicated by the blue dashed line. The point where the polynomial is at its
peak is the maximum predicted electric current, as indicated by the blue circle, and this is where the paddle is placed.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
10
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 12 ---
and resets to 0 whenever the ball misses the paddle hitting the wall. All data from
these separate runs was combined into a single dataset to view the overall averaged
behavior of the hydrogel and assess the performance as well as the repeatability.
Control experiments via interference of information translation.
A set of control ex-
periments were undertaken to create a baseline against which to compare perfor-
mance. The primary purpose of the baseline comparison is to further show that the hy-
drogel’s improved performance was a direct result of the closed loop control and
based on the accurate information received, such as the position of the ball from the
Pong environment. These experiments explore the null hypothesis that the hydrogel’s
performance increase was not a result of accurate game environment information. The
control experiments were designed to accomplish this by interfering with the transla-
tion of information between the hydrogel and the simulated game environment. By
altering this translation, the hydrogel is presented with information that does not accu-
rately represent the simulated game environment, and, thus, it is expected that the hy-
drogel would be unable to effectively control a paddle. There are two key positions
within the closed feedback loop, between the hydrogel and game environment, that
can be altered; these are labeled in Figure 5 and described as follows:
(1) translation from electric current readings in the hydrogels, related to ion con-
centrations at electrodes, to produce motor commands controlling paddle
position within the game environment and
(2) translation from ball position within the game environment to the location of
the electric stimulation on the hydrogel via electrodes.
Control experiments can be applied by altering the ﬂow of information within the
closed feedback loop at either of these key positions:
(1) altering the ﬂow of information from the hydrogel to the simulated game envi-
ronment via interfering with the translation of information at point 1 or
(2) altering the ﬂow of information from the simulated game environment to the
hydrogel via interfering with the translation of information at point 2.
At these positions in the closed control loop, there are also two main ways in which
information translation can be altered: either through the manipulation of mapping
Figure 5. Information ﬂow paths within the experimental setup
Shown is a representation of the ﬂow of information between the MEA and computer systems. The
key points of information transduction that can be altered for the purpose of control experiments
are labeled as 1 and 2.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
11
Article


--- Page 13 ---
functions, altering the way in which electrode positions in the hydrogel map to po-
sitions in the simulated game environment, or by entirely severing the information
path. The latter method would, however, only provide useful information in position
2. If position 1 were to be severed, the information used to control the paddle would
be the result of noise in the electric current sensors reading unconnected electrodes.
This means that the hydrogel itself would have no impact on the actions within the
simulated game environment, and therefore, any results would provide no insight
into the behavior of the hydrogel within the altered control loop.
In all of these control experiment structures, for the null hypothesis to be rejected,
the hydrogel would need to exhibit no adaptation or performance improvement
due to memory. For this to be true, the hydrogel performance in the game would
need to not increase by any statistically signiﬁcant amount. This is also true if the hy-
drogel performs worse than if the paddle was moving randomly. As the paddle is 1/3
the height of the simulated environment, the rejection would require a hit rate below
33% for this condition.
The ﬁrst control experiment, impairing sensing through remapping (referred to as
impaired sensing), was achieved through simulation, utilizing the data collected
through running the experiment with hydrogels. Simulation allows for multiple ar-
rangements of sensing inputs to be tested without the need to run experiments
with hydrogel samples. The method of simulation is detailed in Note S7. In this con-
trol experiment, the electric current sensing regions, as described in Figure 4C, were
rearranged from top, middle, bottom to middle, bottom, top. This ensures that all
sensing regions are in entirely different areas and ensures that the data collected
for each region will not repeat those of the unaltered feedback loop experiment.
As the information transfer between the simulated environment and the simulated
hydrogel is impaired but not severed, this experiment still represents a closed-
loop system. However, as the sensory information is rearranged, the direct effect
of the closed loop is impeded.
The second control experiment, impairing stimulation through remapping (referred
to as impaired stimulation), however, cannot be accomplished in simulation. Due to
the complex interference between stimulated regions within the EAP hydrogel, this
experiment must be performed on the hydrogel sample. This was accomplished by
rearranging the game environment’s regional, or ball’s positional, correlation to the
MEA’s stimulation electrodes. This results in incoherent environmental information
to the hydrogel and effectively impairs its ‘‘vision’’ of the ball position. The rear-
rangement of game environment regions can be seen in Figure 4B, indicated by
the red labels. As with the ﬁrst experiment, the information transfer between the
simulated environment and the hydrogel is impaired but not severed; thus, this
experiment still represents a closed-loop system. However, as the stimulating infor-
mation is rearranged the direct effect of the closed loop is impeded.
The third control experiment, severing stimulation (referred to as severed stimula-
tion) was also performed, using the hydrogel samples. This is because, in this exper-
iment, the hydrogel is under no stimulating voltage but is still under sensing voltage,
a combination that is not present in any of the other experiments. Because of this,
the electric current responses, and by association the paddle positions, cannot be
derived, and simulated, from any of the previous experiments. This experiment
was accomplished by disconnecting the stimulating electrodes from the MEA,
thus preventing the simulated environment from providing any electric stimulation
to the hydrogels. The electric currents from the hydrogels were still measured to
ll
OPEN ACCESS
12
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 14 ---
produce motor commands to control the paddle in the Pong game. With the infor-
mation transfer between the simulated environment and the hydrogel severed, this
experiment represents an open-loop variant of the system. The hydrogel’s perfor-
mance within the game is still recorded; however, the change in performance is in-
dependent of the information provided by the ball’s position within the simulated
environment.
Findings
Memory function of the EAP hydrogels via electric current measurement.
To show
the memory mechanics in the MEA experimental structure, the measured electric
current draw was plotted for each sensing electrode pair. Figure 6 represents the
combined measured electric current data points of all 21 game runs, with data points
sorted against time, averaged using a 600-s moving average window.
The electric current initially rises as ions move toward the electrodes. As the ions
accumulate, their rate of migration decreases due to the increasing concentration
gradient. Eventually, the ions stop moving, and the electric current reaches its
maximum, shown in Figure 6 by the vertical purple dashed line. This gives an initial
view of minimized energy in the form of electric current and establishes the time
range in which memory acquisition may occur. The electric current then falls as the
hydrogel eventually breaks down under the effects of electrolysis,55 impairing
Figure 6. Average electric current over time, with a 600 s window
Shown is the electric current at each sensor over time for the combined unimpaired dataset of runs,
smoothed using a moving average window of 600 s. Due to the averaging, data start at 300 s. The
point of maximum electric current draw is marked with a black dot; 1,203, 1,023, and 1,142 s for top,
middle, and bottom, respectively. The average point of maximum electric current draw is marked
by the purple vertical dashed line at 1,122 s. The orange vertical dashed line marks the earliest point
the EAP gels broken down. Standard error was calculated for each trend from the windowed
samples and found to be at maximum, 0.0169, 0.0053, and 0.0116 for the top, middle, and bottom
trends, respectively.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
13
Article


--- Page 15 ---
ll
OPEN ACCESS
14
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 16 ---
connection between electrodes. This breakdown marks a cutoff point that is indi-
cated in Figure 6 by the orange vertical dashed line at 2,000 s. Thus, the graphs
used to analyze the hydrogel’s performance were limited to between 0 and 2,000 s.
Performance of the EAP hydrogel within the Pong game.
To assess the perfor-
mance of the hydrogel within the Pong game, the hit rate was calculated using the
combined data points of the 21 game runs sorted by timestamp, shown in Figure 7A
as the left axis. 21 experiments were sufﬁcient for reliable results, shown via standard
deviation analysis, described in Note S3. Due to the boundary conditions of the pad-
dle, the top and bottom regions of the wall were hit more often by the ball than the
middle (Figure S4). As the hit rate is different between regions, the performance
improvement rate may be different between regions. For this reason, the hit/miss
data were segmented based on the region in which the hit/miss occurred. Figure 7A
shows the segmented paddle performance curve for the top, middle, and bottom
game regions.
For the middle region, the paddle had an initial ball hit rate of 50%, but over
the course of the game, this rose to maximum of 60%, giving a rise of 10% over
1,450 s. The middle region shows the greatest improvement in performance.
The top and bottom regions are subject to the boundary conditions, leading to a
higher initial hit rate, as seen in Figure 7A, as the trend via the measured electric cur-
rent in those regions is almost linear, as seen in Figure 6. For the bottom region, the
paddle initially hit the ball approximately four times more often than it missed,
hitting 79% of the time. As the bottom region is also a boundary condition, this is
expected. However, over time, this performance did increase up to a maximum of
an 87% hit rate, showing an improvement of 8% over 1,750 s.
When compared to the other regions, when the paddle was in the top region, it
rarely missed the ball. However, when the successful paddle hits are summed for
each region over the 21 game runs, the paddle hit the ball in the top region 49%
of the time, while the middle and bottom regions hit the ball 12% and 40% of the
time, respectively. This distribution can be found in Figure S5A. This distribution fol-
lows the distribution of ball hits as seen in Figure S4, with the top and bottom regions
hitting more often, consistent with each other, while the middle region is hitting far
less often. This means that the distribution of paddle hits matches the inherent dis-
tribution of the game physics and, furthermore, that the increased hit rate is not due
Figure 7. Averaged performance metrics over time
(A) Left axis: the hit rate as a hit-to-miss ratio over time for the combined unimpaired feedback loop dataset, separated based on the region where the
hit/miss occurred, as described in Figure 4B. Smoothed using a moving average window of 600 s, this window size provided the clearest view; additional
window sizes can be seen in Figure S6. The standard error for each windowed sample is shown by the shaded area. The point of maximum performance
is marked on the ‘‘Middle’’ and ‘‘Bottom’’ lines by a black dot; 1,450 and 1,750 s, respectively. The average between these times is marked by the purple
vertical dashed line (1,600 s). As seen from the graph, the middle region saw a performance increase of 0.1, from 0.50 to 0.60. The bottom region
decreased to 0.79 before increasing to 0.87; from its lowest point, this is a performance increase of 0.08. Right axis: the rally length (maximum score
before a miss) against time for the combined unimpaired feedback loop dataset, smoothed using a moving average window of 600 s. The standard error
for each windowed sample is shown by the shaded area. A fourth-degree polynomial best ﬁt line was applied via the MATLAB Polyﬁt function.56 This was
the minimum order polynomial that ﬁt the trend presented by the data. The maximum point of performance is marked by the black dot at 1,744 s. This
marks an increase of 0.8, from 4.3 to 5.1. These data, prior to the application of the moving average, was used to perform a one tailed t test. From 0 s to
the vertical orange dashed line (838 s) indicates the dataset used to represent before MA. From the vertical green dashed line (1,487 s) to the cutoff of
2,000 s indicates the dataset used to represent after MA. The distributions of these datasets can be seen in Figure S8.
(B) Plot of rally aces, representing the number of times the paddle failed to intercept the ball without a single hit, smoothed using a moving average
window of 600 s. The standard error for each windowed sample is shown by the shaded area. A fourth-degree polynomial best ﬁt line was applied via the
MATLAB Polyﬁt function.56 This was the minimum order polynomial that ﬁt the trend presented by the data. The maximum point of performance is
marked by the black dot at 1,706 s. This marks a decrease of 0.04, from 0.23 to 0.19.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
15
Article


--- Page 17 ---
to the ball spending a higher percentage of time in the top region. However, when
summing paddle misses, the top region has far fewer occurrences across all exper-
iments. The paddle, when in the top region, only missed the ball 4% of the time,
while the middle and bottom regions accounted for 66% and 30% of misses, respec-
tively. This distribution can be found in Figure S5B. This means that the compara-
tively high hit rate of the top region is, in actuality, caused by a much lower miss
rate than the middle or bottom regions.
From the readings shown in Figure 6, the top sensor tended to read higher electric
currents than the other regions. These higher electric current readings, and, by
connection, the lower miss rate, are likely due to some bias in the MEA rig construc-
tion. However, this bias was consistent through all experiments, including the con-
trol experiments. It should also be noted that the ball hit locations are distributed
randomly across the ‘‘goal’’ of the game environment; this is supported by the mea-
surement of hit distributions shown in Figures S4 and S5. Similarly, the ball’s speed
and direction are seeded randomly at the start of each game; this is explained in
Note S1. Because of this, the bias should pose no long-term implications within
the results gathered.
As shown in Figure 7A, when in the bottom region, the paddle initially hit the ball
approximately four times more often than it missed, hitting 79% of the time. As
the bottom region is also a boundary condition, this is expected. However, over
time, this performance did increase up to a maximum of an 87% hit rate, showing
an improvement of 8% over 1,750 s.
To better show the overall performance increase through the course of the game, a
graph was generated of the rally lengths against time via the right axis. The rally
length is a measure of how many times the ball was hit before it was missed, shown
as the ‘‘rally score’’ in Figure 4B. The score reached before it resets to zero when
missed is called the rally length. Each time the ball was missed, the rally length
achieved was recorded against the time and plotted using an averaging window
of 600 s as with the previous plots. Figure 7A shows an increase in rally length
over the course of the game. The metric appears to ﬂuctuate more than the hit
rate; however, this is due to differences in scale and averaging over the combined
scores of many samples, leading to higher variation. This does not impact the
conclusion gathered from these results, as the standard error follows the same trend.
This graph clearly shows the ability of the gel to perform within the Pong game
before and after information of the simulated environment has been integrated
into memory, referred to in this study as memory acquisition (MA). With this separa-
tion of states, before and after MA, the signiﬁcance of the increase in the hydrogel-
controlled paddle’s performance, via the rally lengths, can be analyzed.
The signiﬁcance of the change in performance can be analyzed through a statistical
test (using null hypothesis a = 0:05) between the rally length before and after the
performance increase via MA. The sample representing before MA was subsampled
from 0 to 838 s in the rally length dataset, shown via the vertical orange dashed line in
Figure 7A. The sample representing after MA was a subsampled from 1487 to 2000 s
in the rally length dataset, shown via the vertical green dashed line in Figure 7A. De-
tails on how these ranges were selected can be found in Note S4.
Although the pre and post MA values were recorded from the same gel samples,
these values were recorded when the hydrogel was in two distinct states. When in
the pre-MA state, the hydrogel is in the initial stages of the trial, with ions still
ll
OPEN ACCESS
16
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 18 ---
aligning to an almost homogeneous distribution and not yet subject to signiﬁcant
shape change within the EAP. When in the post-MA state, the hydrogel’s distribution
is considerably altered by the ion migration- and stimulation-induced shape change.
Therefore, there is no one-to-one relationship between data points in the two states.
Because of this, the statistical signiﬁcance can be assessed via the p value of sample
comparison, using the critical limit theorem and the Mann-Whitney U test. Details on
this calculation can be found in Note S5.
These calculations give p = 0:00041, placing the probability below 0.05% and re-
jecting the null hypothesis. This validates the improvement before and after MA
as statistically signiﬁcant, despite any ﬂuctuations between experimental runs, and
reinforces the observed increase in hydrogel paddle control ability in the Pong
game environment, showing that the improved hit rate, shown in Figure 7A, was
not region exclusive but contributed to improved overall game performance.
It can also be observed that the peak in rally length aligns with the average peak in hit
rate at approximately 1,600 s, as shown in Figure 7A, with a slight delay of around
150 s. This delay makes sense, as the effect of the improved hit rate would take
some time to translate to an improvement in rally length due to the additional layer
of abstraction caused by the time taken for a full rally to be completed. Further to
this, the average peak in hit rate observed in Figure 7A aligns with the peak electric
current measurement observed in Figure 6, with another delay of around 600 s.
This increase in electric current represents the ion distribution of the hydrogel being
inﬂuenced by the received environmental data, ﬁlling the memory similarly to how
the memory component was observed in the ﬁrst section of this paper as electric cur-
rent measurement. As with the delay between hit rate and rally length, it would take
some time for the base-level electric current measurements to translate to improved
hit ability due to the layers of abstraction caused by the mechanics of the game and
MEA interface.
Last, an additional metric was recorded as rally aces, representing the number of
times the paddle failed to intercept the ball without a single hit. The graph of this
metric is shown in Figure 7B. This graph shows a clear drop in the number of aces
aligning with the points of maximum performance, as found from the previous met-
rics of hit rate and rally lengths, occurring at 1,706 s. This shows an increase in per-
formance at the same point as the rally lengths. It should, however, be noted that the
rally aces before and after MA are very low, below 0.3, despite the further reduction
at the point of maximum performance. This indicates that the performance improve-
ment is considerably more visible in rally lengths as opposed to rally aces, possibly
due to the frequency and range of available data in the two metrics. The combination
of these three metrics shows a clear tendency for performance to increase
throughout the course of the game.
Control experiments via interference of information translation.
Results from the
control experiments were collected, as described in the experimental procedures,
to further show that the hydrogel’s improved performance was a direct result of ac-
curate environmental information fed into the hydrogels. The control experiments
interfered with the translation of information, as shown in Figure 5. The ﬁrst control
experiment interfering with sensing at point 1 was referred to as impaired sensing,
the second control experiment interfering with stimulation at point 2 was referred
to as impaired stimulation, and the third control experiment severing the stimulation
at point 2 was referred to as severed stimulation.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
17
Article


--- Page 19 ---
The hit rate and rally length plots for the ﬁrst, second, and third control experiment
can be seen in Figures S15–S17, respectively. These results are summarized in box-
plots shown in Figures 8A.i and 8A.ii. These plots show the distribution of rally
lengths in both the pre-MA and post-MA states. As the rally length is an integer,
the distribution is discreet and lacks the resolution to show small changes between
states; for this reason, the smoothed dataset, as shown in Figure 7A, was also
included. The plots show the median as a red line, with the box edges corresponding
to the 25th and 75th percentiles and the whiskers showing the maximum and mini-
mum values, discounting outliers. Outliers are deﬁned as 1.5 times the interquartile
range away from the bottom or top of the box. The datasets for these states were
extracted from the full experimental data for each experiment, following the same
procedure as for the t test described in Note S4. As with the unaltered feedback
experiment, the stabilization of the standard deviation in the recorded hit rate of
the datasets was analyzed to ensure that the number of experiments run was sufﬁ-
cient. The plots of these standard deviations over time with varying dataset sizes
can be seen in Figures S11–S13 for the ﬁrst, second, and third control experiment,
respectively.
In Figure 8A.i, it is clear that the rally length for each control experiment is far below
that of the original, unaltered feedback experiment. The best performance in the
Figure 8. Comparison of pre- and post-MA states across experimental setups
Shown is the comparison of pre-MA and post-MA datasets for each experimental set: unaltered feedback, impaired sensing, impaired stimulation, and
severed stimulation. The datasets are sampled from the experimental runs using the same time spans as used for the t test analysis and taken from both
the unaveraged discreet dataset and the smoothed average dataset. The averaged dataset was smoothed using a moving average window of 600 s as
used in previous analyses. On each box, the central mark indicates the median, and the bottom and top edges of the box indicate the 25th and 75th
percentiles, respectively. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered outliers. The datasets that were shown to be statistically
different, via t test, with 0.05% similarity are marked with an asterisk datasets with 0.07% similarity are marked with D.
(A.i) Boxplot of rally lengths unaveraged. The unaltered feedback experiment shows an increase in performance as the rally lengths increase between
sets. All other experiments show little to no change between pre-MA and post-MA states, representing no improvement in performance.
(A.ii) Boxplot of rally lengths averaged. The unaltered feedback experiment shows an increase in performance as the rally lengths increase between
sets. All other experiments show a slight decrease in performance as rally lengths reduce.
(B.i) Boxplot of rally aces unaveraged. The unaltered feedback experiment shows no increase in performance as the rally aces stay approximately 0. All
other experiments show either no change between pre-MA and post-MA states or a reduction in performance as rally aces increase.
(B.ii) Boxplot of rally aces averaged. The unaltered feedback experiment shows a very slight increase in performance as the rally aces decrease. The
impaired sensing experiment shows a signiﬁcant decrease in performance as rally aces increase. All other experiments show a slight reduction in
performance as rally aces increase.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
18
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 20 ---
Pong game was demonstrated based on the closed sensory-motor loop with accu-
rate information of the game environment. Note here that, at the beginning of the
Pong game, labeled as the pre-MA state, the unaltered feedback condition already
shows higher performance, indicating immediately improved performance as a
result of the inference function. In addition, comparing the rally lengths, in Fig-
ure 8A.i, for the pre-MA and post-MA states, it can be seen that emergent memory
occurs as a function of time. The impaired sensing experiment shows the rally
lengths to barely reach beyond 0, showing no improvement in performance. Simi-
larly, the severed stimulation also shows no improvement in performance but is
able to achieve rally lengths up to 2, although this is still far below the unaltered
experiment.
Interestingly, the impaired stimulation shows an increase in performance, although
the achieved rally lengths in the post-MA state are still far below those of the unal-
tered experiment, and the degree of improvement is far less. Figure 8A.ii shows
much of the same; however, the decrease in performance of the control experiments
becomes clearer as the data are presented over the non-discreet space. Each of the
averaged datasets shows a slight decrease in performance as the rally lengths
decrease. However, as these differences only present clearly on the averaged data-
set and are only slight, further analysis is required to ensure their statistical
signiﬁcance.
To conﬁrm the statistical signiﬁcance of the difference in pre-MA and post-MA states
within the control experiments, a series of t tests was performed. The tests were per-
formed on the unaveraged dataset to better represent the collected data, using the
same method as for the unaltered feedback experiment earlier in this study, as
detailed in Note S5. The results of this test are found in Table S1. These results
show that, through all experiments, only the pre-MA and post-MA states in the un-
altered feedback and impaired sensing experiment present a p-value of under 0.05
and, thus, a statistically signiﬁcant difference. The Pong game performance,
between the pre-MA and post-MA states, for the impaired and severed stimulation
experiments was not statistically different. This means that the initially observed
reduction in performance, and thus the impact of memory on said performance, is
not signiﬁcant. The lack of performance supports the initial theories of how the
altered feedback of information from the environment affects the impact of memory
on the hydrogel’s behavior.
To further support these conclusions, rally aces were plotted for all control experi-
ments. These can be found in Figures S18–S20 for the inhibited sensing information,
inhibited stimulation information, and severed stimulation information, respectively.
These results are also summarized in a boxplot shown in Figures 8B.i and 8B.ii, uti-
lizing the same separation of pre-MA and post-MA datasets.
As shown in Figure 8B.i, the control experiments clearly show low performance, with
the average rally aces presenting much higher than in the unaltered experiment, in
both pre-MA and post-MA states. The rally aces of the unaltered feedback experi-
ment are much too small to be shown on this graph, attributed to the much higher
performance; however, because of this, there is little observable change between
pre-MA and post-MA states. The impaired sensing experiment, however, shows a
clear decrease in performance as rally aces increase. The impaired stimulation
experiment shows a similar low performance with high rally aces, although the range
narrows. The severed stimulation experiment shows little change between states on
this scale; this indicates that there was no decrease in performance but also no
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
19
Article


--- Page 21 ---
increase similar to the boxplot of rally lengths for the same experiment shown in Fig-
ure 8A.i. Figure 8A.ii, as with the rally lengths, shows much of the same; however, a
slight decrease in rally aces is visible in the unaltered feedback experiment, aligning
with the increased performance shown in rally lengths. Additionally, each of the
impaired and severed stimulation experiments shows a slight increase in rally aces
over time, indicating a decrease in performance.
As with the rally lengths, the statistical signiﬁcance of the difference in pre-MA and
post-MA states within the rally aces for the control experiments was assessed with a t
test, using the unaveraged dataset. The results of this test can be found in Table S2.
These results, however, showed no signiﬁcant statistical difference between pre-MA
and post-MA states. This is likely because the rally aces resulted in a reduced range
of values compared to the rally lengths and, thus, smaller differences between
states, resulting in less signiﬁcant differences between datasets. However, the
impaired sensing does show the most signiﬁcant difference between states with a
p value of 0.07; although this is not conclusively signiﬁcant, it does enforce the
impact of the altered sensing feedback loop on the hydrogel performance in
the game.
According to both the rally lengths in Figures 8A.i and 8A.ii and the rally aces in
Figures 8B.i and 8B.ii, it is clear that the performance of the impaired sensing exper-
iment is far worse than in the other control experiments and shows some reduction in
performance over the game.
First, in the case of the impaired sensing experiment, the hydrogel ‘‘memorizes’’ the
correct environmental data, but the interpretation of those data is incorrect. With the
hydrogel’s sensing regions rearranged, the hydrogel’s motor commands to control
the paddle are incorrect. Thus, the paddle was moved incorrectly, demonstrating
poor performance. As MA continues, this performance worsens as the paddle is
moved more precisely but with the continued incorrect interpretation.
Second, in the case of the impaired stimulation experiment, even with the incorrect
environmental information (represented by incorrect the ball position in the game
environment), the hydrogel was provided electric stimulation via the rearranged
stimulation electrodes. This means that the hydrogel was still adapting, as the
ions moved to a distribution representative of the provided stimulation. Unfortu-
nately, as the information that the provided stimulation represents was wrong, the
information acquired by the hydrogel was also wrong, and performance decreased.
Third, in the case of the severed stimulation experiment, the hydrogel no longer
received any environmental information, so no stimulation was provided to the
hydrogels. Based on the electric current recording from the hydrogels, the motor
commands were produced to control the paddle, but as no electric stimulation
was provided, the hydrogels were effectively ‘‘blinded.’’ This lack of meaningful in-
formation resulted in a slight reduction in performance as the hydrogel was unable to
adapt to the simulated environment in any meaningful way. This open loop experi-
ment further conﬁrms the importance of the closed loop in the unaltered feedback
experiments.
These observations help to reinforce that the hydrogel’s increase in performance is
directly related to accurate representation of the virtual environment in which it is
acting. A more detailed analysis of the speciﬁc hit rate, rally length, and rally ace
line plots can be found in Note S8.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
20
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 22 ---
Game world performance in relation to memory functions via ion migration and free
energy.
With the signiﬁcance of the observed performance increase within
Figures 7A and 7B conﬁrmed via comparison with the control experiments, there
is a clear performance improvement or memory mechanism at play. In this section,
we discuss the way in which the hydrogel dynamics, through free energy minimiza-
tion via ion migration, result in this emergent memory and adaptation. In other
words, how does the change in free energy as a result of polymer and ion dynamics
(electrostatic interactions between polymers and ions, physical entropy of polymer
networks, ion migration, etc.) alter the paddle’s behavior with respect to ball posi-
tion and result in increased game performance and emergent adaptation via
memory?
The molecular picture of the free energy is extremely complex, as the already com-
plex EAP system (charged polymer networks interacting with ions and water mole-
cules)38 is, in this study, open and coupled to the environmental dynamics of the
Pong game through the electrostatic forces applied externally.
To summarize free energy in the context of the EAP hydrogel, minimization results
from the equalization between three main sources of free energy, as shown in Equa-
tion 2. These are free energy on ions due to the electric ﬁeld, free energy due to the
chemical gradient of ions and water molecules, and free energy due to the electrical
gradient of ions. The electric ﬁeld application causes a gradient of increased free en-
ergy, shifting the equilibrium state.
The game environment closed loop can be summarized as measured electric current
encoded into paddle motor commands and the ball’s position fed back via electric
stimulation to the hydrogel. As the ions migrate to minimize free energy, under the
electric ﬁeld, the redistribution of ions affects the game environment through pad-
dle motion since the paddle’s motion alters the ball’s trajectory through collision.
To develop the chain of events that culminate in improved performance, the kine-
matics of the paddle were analyzed over the course of the game through analysis
of the changing distribution of paddle positions over time. This can be approached
by analyzing the paddle’s motion in response to the ball’s location. This analysis is
detailed in Note S6.
Both the paddle and ball move on the y axis, each vertical position in which the pad-
dle or ball exists can be thought of as a state of the paddle or ball. By applying a win-
dow to the data, the change in positions can be shown as changing state distribu-
tions through the course of the game.
Figure 9A shows the mean of the paddle positional state probability distributions as
a function of time. Individual distributions can be seen in Figure S9, showing prob-
ability distributions for timestamps 200, 400, 600, 800, 1,000, 1,200, 1,400, 1,600,
1,800, and 2,000. In these ﬁgures, there is a clear change in the distribution of pad-
dle positions as the game progresses. Initially starting with a large central peak that
becomes less pronounced as the gel reaches its maximum performance point at
1,800 s, as shown in Figure 7A, where the distribution becomes more uniform.
From this, it can be deduced that the distribution of paddle positions changes
through game play. In line with the principles of free energy, this distribution of
states can be thought of as a memory function. The distribution represents the ball’s
motion within the simulation environment and is represented by the ion distribution
within the polymer network.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
21
Article


--- Page 23 ---
In Figure 9A, the states of y = 0 and y = 1,000 were omitted, as their larger values
obscured the rest of the results. These larger values are a result of the boundary
conditions. To fully explore the memory mechanics, the impact of these boundary
conditions must be investigated.
The boundary conditions occur because the paddle cannot pass beyond the edge of
the game environment. If the measured electric current trend used to place the pad-
dle, as shown in Figure 4C, has a positive gradient toward either edge, the paddle
will be placed at the edge. This means that there are more combinations of electric
current that lead to the paddle being at the edges than in between. The boundary
conditions can be visualized by simulating the paddle with random electric current
inputs, using the algorithm described in Figure 4C, and recording the paddle’s po-
sitional states. A distribution of these simulated results is shown in Figure 9B.i; this
plot shows that, with random electric current, the paddle has a signiﬁcant tendency
toward either end, with a peak distribution in the center. The shape of distribution at
the center can also be explained as a result of the boundary conditions and is anal-
ogous with a depletion force. The boundaries in the paddle’s motion act as two point
forces with high attraction to the paddle; the forces interact at the mid-point be-
tween them, creating a peak.57,58 With greater resolution, the effect of the boundary
conditions could be reduced. However, that is beyond the scope of this study.
The distribution shown in Figure 9B.i is similar in shape to the initial distribution at
Figure 9. Comparison of paddle state distributions over time
(A) The mean distribution of paddle states for all 21 experimental samples as a heatmap. Distributions were sampled every 20 s starting at t = 100 using a
window of 200 s, providing enough data points for accurate representation with minimal sample overlap. The color of each point represents the state
probability. States of 0 and 1,000 pixels were omitted; the probability of these states was much higher that of than others (0.0129 and 0.0177
respectively) due to the boundary conditions and so would obscure the data by scale biasing. An additional set of plots can be seen in Figure S9,
showing individual distributions for the timestamps 200, 400, 600, 800, 1,000, 1,200, 1,400, 1,600, 1,800, and 2,000.
(B) Distributions of positional states from paddle and ball simulations. Each plot shows the distribution divided into bins of each state, signiﬁed by the
blue bars, and divided by regions shown by the orange transparent overlay bars.
(B.i) The simulated distribution of paddle states generated, using the algorithm described in Figure 4C, with randomized electric current values. 10,000
samples were simulated to show the distribution. To allow the central peak to be visible, the left y axis was limited to 0.006; however, the states of 0 and
1,000 are higher than the central peak due to the boundary conditions. The states 0 and 1,000 have probabilities of 0.2754 and 0.2796, respectively.
(B.ii) The simulated distribution of vertical ball states using the maximum hit rate for each region. The ball was simulated with the same game physics,
starting with a random direction and resetting to the center on a miss. The probability of the ball being intercepted by the paddle was recorded as 0.98,
0.58, and 0.86 for the top, middle, and bottom regions, respectively. Each time the ball hit the paddle wall in simulation, these probabilities were used to
simulate whether the ball hit the wall or paddle. As the ball moved, the full path of each ball simulation was recorded, resulting in 600,000 samples, with
the travel of each ball simulation before reset lasting, on average, 245 samples.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
22
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 24 ---
t = 100 in Figure 9A, as the paddle’s initial motion is almost entirely inﬂuenced by
the boundary conditions having yet to gather enough information to diverge.
Although the boundary conditions explain the initial state distribution of the paddle,
to understand the change in behavior, the distribution at maximum performance (t =
1,800) must be assessed. If the paddle’s state distribution represents the ‘‘memo-
rized’’ knowledge about the environment, and the ball’s state distribution represents
the actual environment, a system that is adapting its behavior based on memory
would seek to minimize the difference between these distributions.
Indeed, in an ideal Pong game, the paddle position should match that of the ball’s
vertical position. Ideal anticipation of ball dynamics would mean that the paddle’s
position would be the same as the ball’s position once it hits the wall. Essentially,
the paddle’s vertical position would match that of the ball’s vertical position with a
time offset in relation to the proximity of the ball to the paddle, deﬁned by the de-
gree of anticipation. This means that the paddle and ball should move through the
same positions over the course of the game, meaning that the ball and paddle
should have almost identical distributions of vertical positional states.
By comparing the paddle’s state distribution against that of the ball, the paddle’s
change in behavior can be assessed against what would be the ideal behavior,
and the impact of memory on the hydrogel’s embodiment within the simulated
environment can be contextualized. This allows analysis of what attributes of the
paddle’s distribution change to match that of the ball, leading to improved
performance. The ball’s state distribution can be simulated using the Pong game
environment. However, the ball resets on missing the paddle, which alters the ball’s
distribution. This means that, as performance improves, the ball’s behavior changes
as it is hit more and follows different trajectories. This is evident when comparing two
simulations of the ball’s positional distribution, where the ball is never hit by the pad-
dle and where it is always hit by the paddle, as shown in Figures S14A and S14B. To
accurately compare the paddle’s distribution to that of the ball, the ball’s distribu-
tion must represent the behavior of the ball at the point of maximum performance.
At this point, the hit rates are 0.98, 0.58, and 0.86 for the top, middle, and bottom
regions, respectively, as shown in Figure 7A. When the ball hits the paddle wall, the
ball is either bounced (as if hit by the paddle) or reset (as if hitting the wall) according
to the hit rate of the region in which it hits the paddle wall; this simulated distribution
can be seen in Figure 9B.ii. From this distribution, the ball’s vertical motion over the
game environment is more uniform than the paddle’s initial distribution with fewer
unique states (represented as the number of histogram bins), indicative of the pre-
dictable ball trajectories. As shown in Figure 9A, the paddle’s distribution appears
to become more uniform as the central peak becomes less pronounced. Addition-
ally, the number of unique states reduces, also moving closer to the ball’s distribu-
tion. These observations, however, need to be quantiﬁed via metrics representing
the behavioral change of paddle and ball motion as a result of the closed-loop inter-
action with them.
There are two main metrics used to analyze the attributes of the paddle and ball mo-
tion distribution, both representative of information entropy within the system used
to quantify the impact of memory on the behavior of the EAP hydrogel.
(1) Number of unique states: the number of unique states/positions in which
the paddle/ball is recorded within the sample window used to generate
the distribution (also represented as the number of histogram bins). Deﬁned
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
23
Article


--- Page 25 ---
in Equation 7 as o, where Q is the sample used to make the distribution, O is
the set of elements in Q without repetitions, and jOj represents the cardinal-
ity of O. When applied to the ball, due to the resolution of the ball’s motion
as applied to the gel, the number of unique states of the ball will remain
constant, limited by the 6 regions the ball inhabits, so not providing usable
information. Information entropy S is a function of unique states u. In statis-
tical thermodynamics, physical entropy is deﬁned as S = kB ln U,59 where kB
is the Boltzmann constant and U is the number of microstates. As the paddle
position is determined by conductivity of ions and their distribution, the
physical entropy of the hydrogel is fundamentally linked to the information
entropy of the paddle states, as U inﬂuences unique states u.
(2) Variance in frequency of unique states: the variance in quantity of occurrence
of each unique state, used as a measure for uniformity in the distribution;
deﬁned in equation set (6) as s2, where ci is the number of occurrences of
the ith element of O, barc is the mean value of c, Qj is the jth element of Q,
and q is the number of elements in Q. Shown in Figure 9B.i, the boundary
states of 0 and 1,000 greatly overshadow the central peak distribution. As
the edge conditions are results of the interfacing algorithm and only repre-
sent a fraction of the paddle’s motion, they can be ignored for the purposes
of calculating variance in the paddle. This allows the uniformity in the central
peak to be more accurately compared to that of the ball that is not subject to
boundary conditions, as shown in Figure 9B.ii. Variance is linked to informa-
tion entropy through information theory. Although not directly proportional,
information entropy and variance are both measures of expected values and
share trend directionality60:
s2 =
P ðci  cÞ2
o  1
(Equation 6)
o = jOj
(Equation 7)
where:
ci =
X
q
j = 1
f

Qj; Oi

f

Qj; Oi

=
 1
Qj = Oi
0
QjsOi

Due to the dynamic nature of the hydrogels, each sample will have slight variations in
ion distribution, polymer density, and surface texture; this could lead to differences
in recorded metrics. However, the emergent memory behavior is still driven by the
same mechanics regardless of starting inconsistencies, and, as a result, the trend’s
shape of these metrics will be consistent between samples. To minimize the effect
of gel synthesis inconsistencies, the metrics are normalized via feature scaling to bet-
ter highlight the shape of the trends. The plot of these trends is shown in Figure 10.
The lines represent the mean between all samples, with error bars representing the
standard error between all samples used.
(1) At t = 200, the number of unique paddle states is low, while the variance in
both paddle and ball is high, showing few states with large variations in fre-
quency. This matches the simulated distribution shown in Figure 9B.i, as ex-
pected, as the initial distribution will be almost entirely driven by the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
24
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 26 ---
boundary conditions, as no information has been gathered about the game
environment, and ions remain in a homogeneous distribution.
(2) At t = 600, the number of states increases as the variance decreases in both
paddle and ball. This happens as more information about the environment
is gathered and coincides with the rise in electric current, as shown in Figure 6.
With the application of an electric ﬁeld, the ions start to migrate within the hy-
drogel to represent the stimulation. As ion mobility increases, the number of
unique states increases, and the paddle explores more of its working area.
Simultaneously, as more of the working area is explored, paddle motion be-
comes more evenly distributed, and so the variance decreases. As the ball is
hit more often, its variance decreases as it moves through more of the game
environment before being reset on a miss. This is evident when comparing
variance of simulations where the paddle always hits and always misses the
ball, as shown in Figures S14A and S14B.
(3) At t = 1,000, the number of states reaches its maximum and starts to decrease;
this coincides with the behavior of the electric current, as shown in Figure 6,
and can be explained though ion mobility. Initially, the ions have total
mobility, as the gel is yet to change in structure; as the ion mobility increases,
hysteresis takes effect within the hydrogel, opposing ion migration. Eventu-
ally, ion mobility reaches its maximum, causing the maximum peak in electric
current shown in Figure 6. After this point, the hysteresis effect continues, and
ion mobility decreases, causing the number of unique states to decrease, as
ions start to settle into their ﬁnal positions.
Figure 10. Mean of the normalized number of unique paddle states and the mean of the
normalized variance between unique paddle state frequencies for both the paddle and ball over
the course of the game
Distributions were generated from each gel sample using a window size of 200 s, as in the plots in
Figure 9A, sampled every 20 s from t = 100 to t = 2,000. The number of unique paddle states and
state frequency variance were then normalized, and the mean between gel samples was found. The
standard error between gel samples is shown by the shaded area.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
25
Article


--- Page 27 ---
(4) At t = 1,800 both the number of states and variance in the paddle have
reached their minimum; this coincides with the point of maximum perfor-
mance shown in Figure 7A. The normalized variances in paddle and ball
now match, as the paddle and ball behavior have a stronger coupling. As
the memory continues to saturate, the ion distribution comes to better repre-
sent the ball’s motion. This leads to reduced paddle state variance and
reduced number of unique paddle states, causing the behavior of the paddle
to become more like that of the ball. This causes the ball to be missed less
often, resulting in a more homogeneous distribution of ball states and less
variance, as seen in Figure S14B. The saturation of memory is caused by the
hysteresis and so is linked to the breakdown of the polymer structure. Even-
tually, the same mechanic that allows the gel to retain memory causes the
polymer structure to beak down to a point where it inhibits conductivity
and performance reduces.
The trends shown in Figure 10 and the way in which they coincide with features in
other ﬁgures add another step to the chain of events leading to increased perfor-
mance. This highlights interesting forms of emergent behavior occurring as the
ions migrate to reduce free energy.
Interpretation
As seen through the experimental results, there is a clear increase in performance of
the EAP hydrogel to play the Pong game, as shown in Figure 7A, when given infor-
mation that is representative of the virtual game environment. This improved perfor-
mance directly results from the MA of environmental information without the pres-
ence of active feedback via a reward/punishment system as present in BNN
systems. Over the course of the game, the ball and paddle inhabit more areas of
the game environment, resulting in more environmental information inﬂuencing
memory via stimulation of the polymer structure. In this way, the hydrogel
gathers information about the environment and, through this collection of informa-
tion, improves in performance. The positive impact of memory on EAP hydrogel
performance is possible due to the inference function deﬁned in the encoding
from hydrogel output to paddle position, shown in Figure 4C. The inference function
is how the error between internal states, of the ion distribution, and external
states, of game dynamics, are applied to actions of moving the paddle, similar to
that of unsupervised learning algorithms.
The development of the increased performance, based on the paddle state dy-
namics, can also be directly linked to the underlying mechanics of the EAP hydrogel
through ion migration and memory mechanics due to hysteresis. Through this link-
ing, it can be theorized that, via physical entropy of ion distribution and information
entropy of paddle states, an initial logical similarity can be established between the
properties of EAP hydrogels and computational information theory.
To contextualize the active medium’s interaction with the simulated environment
within the control loop, external states of the environment inﬂuence internal states
of the active medium. In the case of this study, the EAP hydrogel achieves this
through a looped exchange of information called comparable to active inference.
Active inference is a common theory of learning within the study of BNNs, often
conceptualized through free energy minimization and FEP. Active inference analo-
gizes an internal generative pseudo-model used to predict inputs that represent
the external world,23,27,28 based on theories of Bayesian inference.61,62 Similarly,
comparisons to theories of criticality can also be drawn. Criticality theorizes that
ll
OPEN ACCESS
26
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 28 ---
learning coincides with reorganization of the active structure, and hydrogel presents
reorganization or restructuring via the ions and charged polymer networks. This
reorganization could be described as an induced phase transition when the system
is provided energy via applied external stimulation, in line with a simpliﬁed view of
theories of criticality. Figure 6 shows an increase in electric current level, as provided
by the stimulation, that coincides with improved performance, as shown in
Figures 7A and 7B. However, the comparison to theories of BNN learning falls
beyond the scope of this study but provides an interesting avenue of exploration
in future work.
It is clear from Figure 10 that the minimization of the unique number of states and
state frequency variance in both paddle and ball coincide with improved performance.
In Figure 10, the state frequency variance of both the paddle and ball become closer as
performance increases. This quantizationof information entropy is representative of the
hydrogel memory, linked to ion distribution; as information is collected, the memory
becomes saturated, leading to less impact on the overall system. Similarly, the minimi-
zation of both measurements of information entropy align with the minimization of free
energy resulting within the EAP hydrogel as ions migrate. These events also align with
the simpliﬁcation of distributions shown in Figure 9A and maximization of accuracy,
observed in the improved performance shown in Figure 7A. The parallel events shown
here construct an interesting view of the role of memory within the system, highlighting
how information provided to the EAP hydrogel emerges within the behavior of said EAP
hydrogel via its actions in the simulated environment.
The experimental results, presented in Figure 8, also show that, when an incorrect
representation of the virtual environment is provided to the hydrogel or the actions
of the hydrogel are altered, the performance is severely inhibited. This behavior can
be explained through the memory mechanics as a result of ion interactions and
migration. The hydrogel seeks to represent the information given via ion migration.
If the environmental information provided to the hydrogel does not accurately
represent the environment in which the hydrogel’s outputs are being applied, the
ions will redistribute to represent this incorrect information.
The implications of these results also support the earlier comparison to unsupervised
learning techniques. If the same inference function was used for a different goal,
then the performance would decrease. This is because the goal is provided to the
hydrogel via the inference function and is how the error between internal and
external states is used to alter actions. The control experiments show examples of
altering the inference function without altering the goal and the reduced perfor-
mance that follows.
DISCUSSION
This study applied the theories of memory and computation in BNNs to ionic EAP
hydrogels using common mechanics of ion migration and structural reorganization.
First, by measuring ion concentrations through conductivity of the EAP hydrogel af-
ter periods of stimulation, the memory mechanics of the ionic EAP hydrogel were
highlighted. This provided a basis that was then used in the integration of a
closed-loop system in further experimentation.
Second, utilizing techniques in reservoir computing and unsupervised learning, the
ionic EAP hydrogel was embodied in the simulated game world of Pong through the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
27
Article


--- Page 29 ---
use of a custom MEA. The game environment was encoded into stimulations
provided to the hydrogel, and recorded ion concentrations were used as motor
commands within the game world. Through analysis of the behavior of the EAP hy-
drogel within this simulated environment, improved performance was observed
through the course of the game. Additionally, through analysis of how performance
improvement manifested through behavioral changes, the mechanisms of the EAP
hydrogels were linked back to FEP and criticality.
By investigating the chain of events leading from ion migration to game perfor-
mance, the emergent MA of ionic EAP hydrogels was clariﬁed, showing how the
integration of said memory emerged as beneﬁcial behavioral changes in the EAP hy-
drogel’s action within the game. This was achieved by recording information from
the various layers of abstraction, from electric ﬁeld stimulation to rally lengths,
and analyzing the connections between these layers. The Pong game acts as a prob-
lem to be solved. When this problem is provided to the hydrogel as an electric ﬁeld,
it creates a gradient of increased free energy. Due to the active mechanics of the
hydrogel and the memory functions, the hydrogel updates its memory of the envi-
ronment via ion migration, effectively gaining information about the environment
in which it is embodied. The ions within the hydrogel seek to minimize the free en-
ergy gradient caused by the electric stimulation and redistribute; the redistribution
of ions then becomes the solution to the problem. This minimization of free energy
coincides with an increase in relative energy within the system and could be linked to
current theories of learning in BNNs through future work.
The way in which the solution is interpreted allows it to be applied to the problem; in
this case, through conversion of localized ion concentration to paddle motion. As
ions migrate to represent the game environment, presented as a series of changing
electric ﬁelds, the memory in the hydrogel is ﬁlled, resulting in an increase in electric
current draw. This then causes a change in paddle motion to better intercept the
ball, which, in turn, improves the hit rate in the regions, which, in turn, increases
the rally lengths.
The results of this study demonstrate that certain active media, such as ionic EAP
hydrogel, whose behavior is driven by mechanisms comparable to those found in
computational systems, can be used in similar computational applications.
Through the application to such a computational task, using current techniques
in reservoir computing, EAP hydrogels were shown to demonstrate an emergent
memory-like function that contributed to improved performance within the task.
These results show a promising avenue for complex computation achievable within
many
more
active
media
that
also
demonstrate
similar
free-energy-driven
mechanisms.
Future work
This study demonstrated that a form of emergent memory and adaptation, when
embodied in a computational task, is possible in media other than BNNs, when
the behavior of the medium in question is also subject to the principles of free en-
ergy. However, as an initial study of this behavior, the experimental setup used
does not achieve the same spatial resolution that has been achieved with BNNs us-
ing high-density MEAs. In future work, higher-resolution MEAs can be tested to gain
a deeper understanding of the part that free energy and structure reorganization
play in the observed memory functions. Furthermore, through the use of a higher-
density MEA, comparisons to current theories of learning within BNNs can be
explored.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
28
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 30 ---
One such theory is that of FEP, which contextualizes the observed memory as a
pseudo-internal model that updates with environmental feedback. Although FEP
is generally discussed through BNNs, it only occurs in neurons as a network, not indi-
vidually, associating the learning of neural networks with the framework of the FEP.
Comparatively, EAPs are subject to free energy at the more integral physical chem-
istry level, resulting in greater alignment with FEP and criticality theories. These
future experiments would aim to highlight the similarities between the minimization
of free energy within the EAP hydrogel and theories of minimization via active infer-
ence and FEP using the sensory information for better performance.
Another theory of learning that has shown similarities to the hydrogel’s behavior is
that of dynamic criticality. Criticality contextualizes the restructuring of the active
medium’s structure as the generation of long-range signaling pathways, improving
sensory-motor information processing. Through understanding ionic mobility and
EAP mechanics, the restructuring of the hydrogel, and how this impacts memory,
can be described. However, to fully realize the impact of criticality in the possibility
of learning, this reorganization would need to be monitored. In a future study, a
higher-resolution MEA can also be used to monitor the ion distributions at higher
spatial and temporal resolutions. This would allow the emergence of criticality to
be studied alongside the demonstrated immediate adaptation and potential
learning.
Expanding on this potential for future work, both theories of the FEP and criticality
rely on the restructuring of the active medium to result in learned behavior. As sen-
sory inputs inﬂuence structural change, the system moves closer to a critical state.
The new structure is representative of the sensory inputs and, by inference, is
representative of the environment from which the inputs came. Restructuring and
criticality present behaviorally as either action to reduce the difference between
the internal model and sensed environment by making the environment match the
model or by altering the internal model to better reﬂect the environment. Under
this theory, BNNs hold ‘‘beliefs’’ about the state of the environment, and learning
behavior emerges by minimizing internal free energy through either updating these
beliefs or taking action to change the environment to match these beliefs.27,63 Simul-
taneously, it is through the local reduction of free energy and FEP that a critical state
is achieved and the actions and changing beliefs can be achieved globally. The
aforementioned studies22,31,36 show these theories to hold merit, as the application
of BNNs to the Pong game effectively allowed improved performance over time.22
However, this learning is fundamentally achieved via FEP and criticality.23,28 The
exploration of these theories of learning could highlight interesting links between
current theories of learning within BNNs and links between these theories and other
potential media whose mechanics are also driven through free energy and
restructuring.
Additionally, the method used in this study did not employ any form of active
reward/punishment feedback as many neural based MEA systems do. It is possible
that, through the addition of this kind of system, even greater performance could be
achieved for a given purpose. Furthermore, additional applications can attempt to
investigate how the learning behavior is inﬂuenced by task. Investigation of the syn-
thesis procedure would also be a productive avenue of future work, experimenting
with alternate polymer structures to expand the lifetime of the hydrogel and, thus,
open up its application to additional situations. Expanding on this, free-energy-
based mechanics are also found in many other forms of active matter and natural sys-
tems. Through exploration of these alternatives, a medium that is more capable, and
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
29
Article


--- Page 31 ---
just as accessible, could be found. All of these avenues of research, however, fall
outside of the goals of this study but describe an interesting path for future work
and application of this technology.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Resource availability
Lead contact
Requests for further information, resources, and reagents should be directed to and
will be fulﬁlled by the lead contact, Yoshikatsu Hayashi (y.hayashi@reading.ac.uk).
Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and code availability
 All generated data have been deposited at Zenodo under https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.12740409 and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
 All original code has been deposited at Zenodo under https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.12740409 and is publicly available as of the date of publication.
 Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this pa-
per is available from the lead contact upon request.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.
2024.102151.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project is fully funded by Process Vision Ltd. (https://www.processvision.com/).
Y.H. would like to thank Prof. Wagstaff for the fruitful discussion alongside the
Reading and Writing Retreats.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, V.S. and Y.H.; methodology, V.S. and Y.H.; software, V.S.; formal
analysis, V.S.; investigation, V.S.; writing – original draft, V.S., Y.H., and W.H.;
writing – review & editing, V.S., Y.H., and W.H.; supervision, Y.H. and W.H.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 13, 2024
Revised: June 30, 2024
Accepted: July 19, 2024
Published: August 22, 2024
REFERENCES
1. Ruskin, H.J., and Walshe, R. (2006). Emergent
computing-introduction to the special theme.
ERCIM News 64, 24–25.
2. Bondar, S., Hsu,J.C., Pfouga, A., and Stjepandic,
J. (2017). Agile digitale transformation of
enterprise architecture models in engineering
collaboration. Procedia Manuf. 11, 1343–1350.
3. Fernando, C., and Sojakka, S. (2003). Pattern
Recognition in a Bucket. In European
Conference on Artiﬁcial Life (Springer),
pp. 588–597.
4. Van der Sande, G., Brunner, D., and Soriano,
M.C. (2017). Advances in photonic
reservoir computing. Nanophotonics 6,
561–576.
5. Tero, A., Takagi, S., Saigusa, T., Ito, K., Bebber,
D.P., Fricker, M.D., Yumiki, K., Kobayashi, R.,
and Nakagaki, T. (2010). Rules for biologically
inspired adaptive network design. Science 327,
439–442.
6. Duen˜ as-Dı´ez, M., and Pe´ rez-Mercader, J.
(2019). How chemistry computes: language
recognition by non-biochemical chemical
automata. from ﬁnite automata to turing
machines. iScience 19, 514–526.
7. Wang, A.L., Gold, J.M., Tompkins, N.,
Heymann, M., Harrington, K.I., and Fraden, S.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
30
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article


--- Page 32 ---
(2016). Conﬁgurable nor gate arrays from
belousov-zhabotinsky micro-droplets. Eur.
Phys. J. Spec. Top. 225, 211–227.
8. Misra, J., and Saha, I. (2010). Artiﬁcial
neural networks in hardware: A survey of two
decades of progress. Neurocomputing 74,
239–255.
9. Ve´ gh, J. (2019). How amdahl’s law limits the
performance of large artiﬁcial neural networks.
Brain informatics 6, 1–11.
10. Mainzer, K. (2009). From embodied mind to
embodied robotics: Humanities and system
theoretical aspects. J. Physiol. Paris 103,
296–304.
11. Cangelosi, A., Bongard, J., Fischer, M.H., and
Nolﬁ, S. (2015). Embodied Intelligence. In
Springer Handbook of Computational
Intelligence (Springer), pp. 697–714.
12. Mu¨ ller, V.C., and Hoffmann, M. (2017). What Is
Morphological Computation? On How the
Body Contributes to Cognition and Control.
Artif. Life 23, 1–24.
13. Shapiro, L., and Spaulding, S. (2021).
Embodied Cognition. In The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, E.N. Zalta, ed.
(Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University). Winter 2021 edition.
14. Tanaka, G., Yamane, T., He´ roux, J.B., Nakane,
R., Kanazawa, N., Takeda, S., Numata, H.,
Nakano, D., and Hirose, A. (2019).
Recent advances in physical reservoir
computing: A review. Neural Network. 115,
100–123.
15. Schrauwen, B., Verstraeten, D., and Van
Campenhout, J. (2007). An overview of
reservoir computing: theory, applications and
implementations. In Proceedings of the 15th
european symposium on artiﬁcial neural
networks, pp. 471–482.
16. Heiney, K., Ramstad, O.H., Sandvig, I., Sandvig,
A., and Nichele, S. (2019). Assessment
and manipulation of the computational
capacity of in vitro neuronal networks
through criticality in neuronal avalanches in
2019. In IEEE Symposium Series on
Computational Intelligence (SSCI) (IEEE),
pp. 247–254.
17. Aaser, P., Knudsen, M., Ramstad, O.H., van de
Wijdeven, R., Nichele, S., Sandvig, I., Tufte, G.,
Stefan Bauer, U., Halaas, Ø., Hendseth, S., et al.
(2017). Towards making a cyborg: A closed-
loop reservoir-neuro system. In ECAL 2017, the
Fourteenth European Conference on Artiﬁcial
Life, 14, pp. 430–437.
18. Mateos-Aparicio, P., and Rodrı´guez-Moreno,
A. (2019). The impact of studying
brain plasticity. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13, 66.
19. Chao, Z.C., Bakkum, D.J., and Potter, S.M.
(2008). Shaping embodied neural networks for
adaptive goal-directed behavior. PLoS
Comput. Biol. 4, e1000042.
20. Bakkum, D.J., Chao, Z.C., and Potter, S.M.
(2008). Spatio-temporal electrical stimuli shape
behavior of an embodied cortical network in a
goal-directed learning task. J. Neural. Eng. 5,
310–323.
21. DeMarse, T.B., and Dockendorf, K.P. (2005).
Adaptive ﬂight control with living neuronal
networks on microelectrode arrays. In
Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks, 2005,
3Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Joint
Conference on Neural Networks, 2005 (IEEE),
pp. 1548–1551.
22. Kagan, B.J., Kitchen, A.C., Tran, N.T.,
Habibollahi, F., Khajehnejad, M., Parker, B.J.,
Bhat, A., Rollo, B., Razi, A., and Friston, K.J.
(2021). In Vitro Neurons Learn and Exhibit
Sentience when Embodied in a Simulated
Game-World.
23. Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a
uniﬁed brain theory? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11,
127–138.
24. Demekas, D., Parr, T., and Friston, K.J. (2020).
An investigation of the free energy principle for
emotion recognition. Front. Comput.
Neurosci. 14.
25. Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a
rough guide to the brain? Trends Cognit. Sci.
13, 293–301.
26. Friston, K., Kilner, J., and Harrison, L. (2006). A
free energy principle for the brain. J. Physiol.
Paris 100, 70–87.
27. Parr, T., and Friston, K.J. (2019). Generalised
free energy and active inference. Biol. Cybern.
113, 495–513.
28. Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T.,
Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and Dolan, R.J.
(2013). The anatomy of choice: active
inference and agency. Front. Hum. Neurosci.
7, 7.
29. Isomura, T., Kotani, K., and Jimbo, Y. (2015).
Cultured cortical neurons can perform
blind source separation according to the free-
energy principle. PLoS Comput. Biol. 11,
e1004643.
30. Isomura, T., and Friston, K. (2018). In vitro
neural networks minimise variational free
energy. Sci. Rep. 8, 16926.
31. Habibollahi, F., Kagan, B.J., Burkitt, A.N., and
French, C. (2023). Critical dynamics arise during
structured information presentation within
embodied in vitro neuronal networks. Nat.
Commun. 14, 5287.
32. Bak, P. (2013). How Nature Works: The Science
of Self-Organized Criticality (Springer
Science & Business Media).
33. Bak, P., Tang, C., and Wiesenfeld, K. (1988).
Self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev. 38,
364–374.
34. Bak, P., and Creutz, M. (1994). Fractals and Self-
Organized Criticality. In Fractals in Science
(Springer), pp. 27–48.
35. Feder, J. (2013). Fractals (Springer Science &
Business Media).
36. Isomura, T., Kotani, K., Jimbo, Y., and Friston,
K.J. (2023). Experimental validation of the free-
energy principle with in vitro neural networks.
Nat. Commun. 14, 4547.
37. Ramaswamy, S. (2010). The mechanics and
statistics of active matter. Annu. Rev. Condens.
Matter Phys. 1, 323–345.
38. Tanaka, T., Nishio, I., Sun, S.T., and Ueno-
Nishio, S. (1982). Collapse of gels in an electric
ﬁeld. Science 218, 467–469.
39. Marchetti, M., Joanny, J.F., Ramaswamy, S.,
Liverpool, T.B., Prost, J., Rao, M., and Simha,
R.A. (2013). Hydrodynamics of soft active
matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 1143.
40. Otake, M., Kagami, Y., Inaba, M., and Inoue, H.
(2002). Motion design of a starﬁsh-
shaped gel robot made of electro-active
polymer gel. Robot. Autonom. Syst. 40,
185–191.
41. Strong, V., Holderbaum, W., and Hayashi, Y.
(2022). Electroactive polymer
gels as probabilistic reservoir
automata for computation. iScience 25,
105558.
42. Ku¨ rsten, R., Sushkov, V., and Ihle, T. (2017).
Giant kovacs-like memory effect
for active particles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119,
188001.
43. Atkins, P., and De Paula, J. (2006). Atkins’
Physical Chemistry, 8.
44. Yashin, V.V., Suzuki, S., Yoshida, R., and Balazs,
A.C. (2012). Controlling the dynamic behavior
of heterogeneous self-oscillating gels.
J. Mater. Chem. 22, 13625–13636.
45. Kuksenok, O., Yashin, V.V., and Balazs, A.C.
(2007). Mechanically induced chemical
oscillations and motion in responsive gels. Soft
Matter 3, 1138–1144.
46. De Tommasi, D., Puglisi, G., and Zurlo, G.
(2014). Hysteresis in electroactive polymers.
Eur. J. Mech. Solid. 48, 16–22.
47. Bassil, M., Davenas, J., and EL Tahchi, M.
(2008). Electrochemical properties
and actuation mechanisms of
polyacrylamide hydrogel for artiﬁcial
muscle application. Sensor. Actuator. B 134,
496–501.
48. Gray, J.R. (2004). Conductivity analyzers and
their application. Environ. Instrum. Anal.
Handb. 1, 491–510.
49. Atkins, P., and De Paula, J. (2011). Physical
Chemistry for the Life Sciences (Oxford
University Press).
50. Atkins, P., Atkins, P.W., and de Paula, J. (2014).
Atkins’ Physical Chemistry (Oxford university
press).
51. Tanaka, T., Fillmore, D., Sun, S.T., Nishio, I.,
Swislow, G., and Shah, A. (1980). Phase
transitions in ionic gels. Phys. Rev. Lett. 45,
1636–1639.
52. Oyen, M.L. (2014). Mechanical characterisation
of hydrogel materials. Int. Mater. Rev.
59, 44–59.
53. Bourtchouladze, R. (2002). Memories Are
Made of This: How Memory Works in
Humans and Animals (Columbia University
Press).
54. Schiavone, G., Kang, X., Fallegger, F., Gandar,
J., Courtine, G., and Lacour, S.P. (2020).
Guidelines to study and develop soft electrode
systems for neural stimulation. Neuron 108,
238–258.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
31
Article


--- Page 33 ---
55. Jia, K., Li, X., and Wang, Y. (2021).
Electrochemical breakdown in
hydrogel ionotronic devices. Soft Matter 17,
834–839.
56. Mathworks, Polyﬁt. https://www.mathworks.
com/help/matlab/ref/polyﬁt.html, Acessed 05/
08/2024.
57. Mao, Y., Cates, M., and Lekkerkerker, H. (1995).
Depletion force in colloidal systems. Phys. Stat.
Mech. Appl. 222, 10–24.
58. Lekkerkerker, H.N., and Tuinier, R. (2011).
Depletion Interaction. In Colloids and
the Depletion Interaction (Springer),
pp. 57–108.
59. Schroeder, D.V. (2000). An Introduction
to Thermal Physic, 57 (Addison Wesley).
60. Ebrahimi, N., Maasoumi, E., and Sooﬁ, E.S.
(1999). Ordering univariate distributions by
entropy and variance. J. Econom. 90,
317–336.
61. Neal, R.M. (2012). Bayesian Learning for Neural
Networks, 118 (Springer Science & Business
Media).
62. Knill, D.C., and Pouget, A. (2004). The bayesian
brain: the role of uncertainty in neural coding
and computation. Trends Neurosci. 27, 712–719.
63. Parr, T., and Friston, K.J. (2018). The discrete
and continuous brain: from decisions to
movement—and back again. Neural Comput.
30, 2319–2347.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
32
Cell Reports Physical Science 5, 102151, September 18, 2024
Article
