Most animals use light to obtain crucial information 
about their environment, including information about 
their orientation as well as visual information obtained 
through highly sophisticated sensory organs. Plants use 
light to optimize the exposure of their leaves for pho-
tosynthesis and to control the flowering period or seed 
formation. Many microorganisms, such as filamentous 
fungi, use light as a source of information. They are 
equipped with several photosensory systems and can 
respond to different light intensities and wavelengths 
(colours)1–5 (Fig. 1).
Fungi have a crucial role in the remineralization 
of organic matter, are important plant and animal path-
ogens and are frequently used in industry, for instance, 
in the production of secondary metabolites or cata-
lytic enzymes. Hence, advances in the study of fun-
gal biology should help to further our understanding 
of their pathogenicity and improve their application 
to biotechnology6.
Although fungal light responses have been studied for 
more than 50 years, the availability of hundreds of fungal 
genome sequences and the recent developments of novel 
experimental approaches, such as genome-wide expres-
sion analyses or whole-genome sequencing to identify 
mutations, have provided novel insights into fungal light 
sensing and signalling pathways. It was shown that in 
several fungi the expression of a large proportion of the 
genome is regulated by light and that, thus, light affects 
many aspects of fungal life. Furthermore, light signalling 
may be tightly linked with other pathways such as sporu-
lation, primary metabolic pathways or the production of 
secondary metabolites or hydrolytic enzymes7–15.
Only a few different photoreceptors developed during 
evolution. Such photoreceptor proteins always contain 
an organic molecule as the chromophore, which absorbs 
visual light. There are flavin-binding blue-light receptors, 
retinal-containing green-light sensors and proteins with 
a linear tetrapyrrole as the chromophore that function as 
red-light sensors. Most fungi contain at least two types of 
photoreceptors, and some even contain all three. Some 
blue-light photoreceptors reside in the nucleus and can 
directly control gene expression, whereas the red-light 
receptor phytochrome has nuclear and cytoplasmic 
functions and is linked to the transcriptional machin-
ery through other signalling modules. Both blue-light 
and red-light receptors also control the DNA structure 
of certain target genes and thereby their transcription. 
The green-light photoreceptor is a transmembrane pro-
tein, and it is still unclear how signalling occurs. There 
is also evidence that a particular blue-light receptor (an 
orthologue of white collar 1 (WC-1)) can sense green 
light16. In all cases, light causes primary changes of the 
attached chromophore, which in turn lead to confor-
mational changes of the proteins and changes in their 
activities. Thereby, light controls the activity of many 
genes and metabolic and morphogenetic pathways. 
One question that arises is why fungi use such complex 
photosensory systems.
Fungi live in many different habitats, ranging from 
the desert to the tropics, and their environment changes 
frequently and often drastically. Even in moderate zones, 
the soil conditions may change dramatically over the 
course of a day. There are two strategies to cope with 
this challenge: adapt physiologically or escape and 
conquer new habitats. Many fungi produce spores for 
dispersal, and light is a reliable informational source to 
indicate air exposure, which in some fungi is required 
to induce sporulation and/or the formation of a fruit-
ing body17,18 (Fig. 2). Spores have a thick, pigmented cell 
wall for protection and may be covered with very resist-
ant hydrophobins19. Once spores germinate, hyphae 
may be fully exposed to harmful ultraviolet light, and 
Chromophore
An organic molecule that 
absorbs light in the visible 
spectrum. Photoreceptors are 
proteins containing a 
chromophore, which upon  
light absorption cause 
structural changes of the 
attached protein.
Flavin
An organic molecule with a 
characteristic tricyclic 
heterocycle (isoalloxazine).
Linear tetrapyrrole
An organic molecule  
composed of four five-atom 
rings. They can be cyclic, as in 
haemoglobin, or linear, like  
in biliverdin.
Phytochrome
A protein that contains a linear 
tetrapyrrole as a chromophore 
and absorbs red and far-red 
light. It is the main photosensor 
of plants and controls 
morphogenesis.
Light sensing and responses in fungi
Zhenzhong Yu and Reinhard Fischer   *
Abstract | Light controls important physiological and morphological responses in fungi.  
Fungi can sense near-ultraviolet, blue, green, red and far-red light using up to 11 photoreceptors  
and signalling cascades to control a large proportion of the genome and thereby adapt to 
environmental conditions. The blue-light photoreceptor functions directly as a transcriptional 
regulator in the nucleus, whereas the red-light-sensing and far-red-light-sensing phytochrome 
induces a signalling pathway to transduce the signal from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Green 
light can be sensed by retinal-binding proteins, known as opsins, but the signalling mechanisms 
are not well understood. In this Review , we discuss light signalling processes in fungi, their 
signalling cascades and recent insights into the integration of light signalling pathways with 
other regulatory circuits in fungal cells.
Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology (KIT) — South 
Campus, Institute for Applied 
Biosciences, Department of 
Microbiology, Karlsruhe, 
Germany.
*e-mail: reinhard.fischer@
KIT.edu
https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41579-018-0109-x
REVIEWS
Nature Reviews | Microbiology

germination after sunset would be advantageous. 
Indeed, in Aspergillus nidulans, Aspergillus fumigatus 
and Fusarium oxysporum, light delays germination13,20. 
However, spore formation and germination may be the 
result of the integration of many internal and external 
cues, such as light, air exposure or the nutritional stage 
of the mycelium. Hence, light signalling must be tightly 
connected to other signalling cascades, developmental 
pathways and metabolic networks.
Fungi may also adapt their physiology in addition 
to developmental programmes. If their habitat dries 
out, fungi respond by producing compatible solutes 
to prevent water loss21. This occurs frequently if fungi 
approach the surface of organic substrates and are 
exposed to light. Therefore, light can be regarded as an 
alerting system to prepare fungi for stressful conditions 
before they arise. Such changes in the environment also 
occur during the day–night cycle, and many fungi use 
a circadian clock system to foresee regularly changing 
environments and be prepared for the upcoming day 
or night22,23. Among other factors, light is an important 
input into the clock system, and in Neurospora crassa 
and other fungi, the light-sensing and circadian clock 
systems share the blue-light photoreceptor WC-1 (ref.24). 
Nevertheless, genes can be independently regulated by 
light, by the clock or by both25.
Finally, some fungi can not only detect differences in 
the colour (wavelength) and intensity of light but also 
sense the direction of illumination, as exemplified by 
the phototropism of the sporangiophore of Phycomyces 
blakesleeanus26,27 (Fig. 2).
The numerous examples of light responses in fungi 
indicate the complexity of light sensing and signal 
transduction and a crucial role in regulating fungal life 
(Figs 1,2). Because fungi are amenable to most molecular, 
genetic, cell-biological, physiological and biochemical 
methods, they serve as model systems to understand 
regulatory networks in eukaryotic cells.
In this Review, we summarize the structural basis 
for light sensing in filamentous fungi and explore the 
light signalling mechanisms for blue-light, green-light 
and red-light photoreceptors. Finally, we review our cur-
rent understanding of crosstalk of the light signalling 
pathways with other cellular pathways.
The structural basis for light sensing
Most cellular pathways are driven by proteins, and thus 
physical signals need to be transmitted to the protein 
level. In the case of light sensing, signal amplification 
and decoding of small conformational changes in the 
chromophore (which sometimes occurs in the range of 
picoseconds) into a code that cells can understand are 
required. Proteins without chromophores absorb ultra-
violet light through aromatic amino acids. Likewise, 
the photoreceptor UVR8 in Arabidopsis thaliana con-
tains specific tryptophan residues, and ultraviolet-light 
absorption by those residues leads to the conversion of a 
UVR8 dimer into monomers that shuttle into nuclei28. In 
comparison, visible-light sensing depends on a chromo-
phore with aromatic residues or other systems with con-
jugated π-electrons. Such chromophores include the 
isoalloxazin ring systems in flavins, the retinal molecule 
or linear tetrapyrroles such as biliverdin (Fig. 3).
Blue-light photoreceptors. Flavin chromophores can 
be bound to different domains in a photoreceptor 
protein, and three major classes of blue-light receptors 
are distinguished: the light, oxygen and voltage (LOV) 
domain-containing proteins, the blue-light sensor 
Phytochrome
Processes controlled by light 
and photoreceptors:
• Spore germination 
• Vegetative growth
• Asexual and sexual development
• Circadian clock 
• Phototropism 
• Stress response 
• Secondary metabolism
• Pathogenicity
• Nutrient uptake
WCC
?
?
?
VVD
HOG 
pathway
Opsin
Cryptochrome
Photolyase
BLUF?
DNA
AtfA
Fig. 1 | Photoreceptors in filamentous fungi and overview of light-controlled 
processes. Fungi contain flavin-binding blue-light receptors, retinal-containing green-light 
sensors, known as opsins, and proteins with a linear tetrapyrrole as a chromophore that 
function as red-light sensors (phytochromes). Three major classes of blue-light receptors 
are distinguished: the light, oxygen and voltage (LOV) domain-containing proteins such as 
white collar 1 (WC-1) or vivid (VVD), the blue-light sensor using FAD (BLUF) proteins and the 
cryptochrome and photolyase protein family. Those photoreceptors can be found in both 
the cytoplasm and the nucleus, and the green-light photoreceptor is a transmembrane 
protein. One of the main response outputs of light signalling is the control of gene 
expression, and hence the light signal has to be transmitted into the nuclei. In the case of 
blue-light signalling through the white collar complex (WCC) (comprising WC-1 and 
WC-2), the WCC resides in the nucleus and directly regulates gene expression. For clock 
functioning, shuttling of the WCC between the cytoplasm and the nucleus is important147. 
By contrast, cytoplasmic phytochromes use the high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) signalling 
module for signal transduction from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. At the end of the HOG 
pathway is the AtfA transcription factor, which induces gene expression. However, a 
fraction of phytochrome is also found in nuclei, where it controls the activity of the 
chromatin-remodelling machinery (not shown), which also contributes to gene expression. 
In Aspergillus nidulans, the phytochrome interacts in the nucleus with the WCC, but the 
functional role of the interaction remains to be determined. Opsin resides in the 
cytoplasmic membrane, and the signalling mechanism is not yet known (indicated by the 
question mark). The blue-light receptor VVD interacts with the WCC and functions as a 
negative regulator of WCC-regulated genes98,148. The signalling pathways for cryptochrome 
and photolyases are not clear (indicated by the question marks). In Botrytis cinerea, one 
cryptochrome resides in the cytoplasm and one in the nucleus55. Processes that are 
controlled by light and photoreceptors include spore germination, vegetative growth, the 
circadian clock , stress responses, metabolism, nutrient uptake and pathogenicity.
Circadian clock
Describes a stable oscillation 
synchronized by light. The 
period is approximately (circa) 
a day (diem).
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews

using FAD (BLUF) proteins and the cryptochrome and 
photolyase protein family. The reaction mechanism for 
LOV domains, which were first described in plant photo­
tropins29, is not fully understood. In the dark state, 
the flavin (flavin mononucleotide (FMN) or FAD) is 
embedded into a pocket of the photoreceptor protein 
without further interactions. The chromophore is fully 
oxidized, and illumination causes a covalent adduct for-
mation between a carbonyl group of the isoalloxazin ring 
system in the flavin and the thiol group of a cysteinyl 
residue of the photoreceptor protein. Although not 
completely resolved, evidence suggests that electron 
transfer occurs between the cysteine residue and the 
flavin, which results in the formation of a thioether30,31. 
Returning the protein to the dark leads to a reversion of 
all processes, including cleavage of the covalent bond. 
The series of events is called photocycle. Further insights 
into the mechanism of blue-light perception and dark 
reversion came from the study of the fungal small LOV 
domain-containing protein vivid (VVD)32,33. In addi-
tion to the critical cysteine residue, several amino acids 
in the protein are important for function. Those resi-
dues determine the lifetime of the photoadduct, which 
is important for the biological function of VVD34,35. 
The crystal structures of VVD were obtained in both 
the dark and the light states. Surprisingly, illumination 
of the protein caused dimerization of two subunits into 
a homodimer36. VVD can also interact with the white 
collar complex (WCC) (see below)37,38. A prerequisite 
for VVD dimerization is a glutamine residue, which 
flips its amide side chain owing to altered hydrogen 
a
b
c
d
e
1 cm
1 cm
100 μm
200 μm
1 cm
1 cm
1 mm
1 mm
Wild type
Dark
Dark
Light
∆wc-1
∆vvd
∆fphA
WT
Red light
∆fphA
WT
Fig. 2 | light responses in model fungi. a | Neurospora 
crassa strains were grown in test tubes on an agar surface 
in light at 25 °C for 5 days. The orange colour indicates  
the production of carotenoid. Mutant cells lacking the 
blue-light photoreceptor white collar 1 (WC-1) (Δwc-1 
mutant) produce less carotenoid than the wild type (WT).  
By contrast, cells that lack the small light, oxygen and 
voltage (LOV) domain-containing photoreceptor protein 
vivid (VVD) (denoted ∆vvd) produce more carotenoid than 
the WT, which is indicative of the loss of photoadaptation.  
b | Aspergillus nidulans strains were grown on agar plates in 
the dark or under red-light illumination at 37 °C for 5 days. 
The WT forms more cleistothecia (yellow structures) and 
less green conidia in darkness than in red light. Light 
represses the formation of cleistothecia. In a strain that 
lacks the phytochrome FphA (ΔfphA), red light suppresses 
cleistothecia formation much less than in the WT. The exact 
mechanisms as to how phytochrome controls genes 
required for cleistothecia formation are not known.  
The scanning electron microscopic pictures show a 
cleistothecium (left; 500 µm diameter) surrounded by Hülle 
cells and a conidiophore (right; spores are 3 µm in 
diameter). c | Agar plates grown with Botrytis cinerea in the 
dark or with a rhythm of 12 h dark and 12 h light are shown. 
In the dark , sclerotia (hardened fungal hyphae for survival) 
are formed, whereas in the presence of light, green conidia 
are produced. d | An agar plate grown with Trichoderma 
atroviride and illuminated for 5 min with blue light and 
further grown in the dark is shown. Green conidia formed 
at only the growth front at the time of illumination.  
e | Sporangiophores of Phycomyces blakesleeanus (left)  
and illuminated with light from the left (right picture) are 
shown. The phototropic response depends on the WC-1 
photoreceptor MADA51. Part a image courtesy of Z. Yu.  
Part b adapted with permission from ref.69, Elsevier. Part c 
images courtesy of J. Schumacher, University of Münster, 
Germany. Part d adapted with permission from ref.133, 
Elsevier. Part e adapted with permission from ref.102, Elsevier.
Sporangiophore
The morphological structure of 
fungi that produce (resistant) 
spores, which are small entities 
for dispersal or for survival.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews

bonding interactions after protonation of the flavin 
chromophore39. VVD is important for photoadaptation 
and inhibits WCC activity40,41 (Fig. 2).
The first fungal LOV domain-containing protein 
identified was the white collar (WC) protein WC-1 in 
N. crassa, and the discovery of FAD as a chromophore 
was a true breakthrough in the fungal field42–44. A cru-
cial cysteine and approximately 11 other amino acids 
are important for blue-light sensing45. The 127 kDa 
WC-1 protein contains PAS domains for protein 
interaction, transcriptional activation domains and a 
zinc-finger DNA-binding domain (Fig. 3). A putative 
NH
O
N
N
N
SH
R
Cys
Protein
O
S
N
N
N
NH
H
R
Cys
Protein
H
11
12
O
H
11
12
O
O
O
O
O
H
N
N
N+
N
HN
HN
H2N
OH
OH
–OOC
COO–
O
H
16
15
N
Cys
S
O
NH
NH+ HN
–OOC
COO–
16
15
Cys
S
O
O
NH
NH+ HN
HN
Light
Pr
Phytochrome (Aspergillus nidulans FphA)
Opsin (Fusarium fujikuroi CarO)
1,280 amino acids
307 amino
acids
1,167 amino
acids
567 amino
acids
207 amino 
acids
294 amino 
acids
WC-1 (Neurospora crassa WC-1)
Cryptochrome (Aspergillus nidulans CryA)
Pfr
Dark
Light
Retinal
Biliverdin
Flavin
MTHF
All-trans-retinal
11-cis-retinal
Dark
Light
Dark
PAS
Retinal
binding
GAF
PHY
Histidine
kinase
ATPase
Response
regulator
LOV
Photolyase
FAD
binding
VVD (Trichoderma reesei Env1)
LOV
BLUF (Ustilago maydis BIf1)
BLUF
PAS
PAS
Zinc ﬁnger
Protein
Protein
Fig. 3 | Structure of fungal photoreceptors and their chromophores. For each photoreceptor type, one representative 
is shown. Phytochrome consists of a photosensory domain composed of a PAS, a GAF and a PHY domain. In fungi, the 
chromophore, a linear tetrapyrrole, is bound to a cysteine in the PAS domain. The second half of the protein consists of a 
signal output domain composed of a histidine kinase and a response regulator domain. The chromophore absorbs red 
light and undergoes isomerization and a conformational change. The nature of the chromophore is not known yet, but 
Aspergillus nidulans phytochrome assembles in vitro with biliverdin. Opsin is a transmembrane protein with retinal as 
chromophore. Upon absorption of green light, the retinal undergoes a cis–trans isomerization. The white collar 1 (WC-1) 
protein and vivid (VVD) contain light, oxygen and voltage (LOV) domains where an FAD is covalently bound to a cysteine 
upon illumination. The WC-1 protein also contains two PAS domains for protein–protein interaction and a zinc-finger 
domain for DNA binding. The blue-light sensor using FAD (BLUF) protein contains flavin, and cryptochrome additionally 
contains a methyltetrahydrofolate (MTHF) molecule. FAD is bound differently from LOV domains. The size of the 
photoreceptors is indicated in amino acids. VVD, vivid.
Cryptochrome
A flavin-binding protein that 
senses blue light and is 
involved in circadian rhythms 
in higher eukaryotes.
Photolyase
An enzyme that repairs DNA 
damage caused by ultraviolet 
light. The enzyme contains 
flavin as cofactor and itself 
requires blue light for activity.
Photoadduct
A chromophore that attaches 
covalently to a protein.
Photoadaptation
The phenomenon in which 
after light signalling the system 
becomes insensitive for a 
certain time.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews

nuclear localization domain was later shown to be 
involved in DNA binding, but this domain is not 
required for nuclear import46. A second protein essen-
tial for blue-light sensing was cloned shortly after 
WC-1 and named WC-2. WC-2 is a 57 kDa protein 
that lacks a LOV domain47 and can localize in nuclei 
despite the lack of a functional nuclear localization 
signal48,49. WC-1 and WC-2 form the heterodimeric 
WCC, which can induce transcription, but the nuclear 
import mechanisms for both proteins remain elusive. 
The fact that WC-1 is a transcription factor and con-
tains a flavin for light perception suggests that the light 
signal transduction cascade is minimalistic. The WCC 
functions as a transcriptional regulator and a photo-
sensor at the same time. If WC-1 or WC-2 are lacking, 
N. crassa cannot sense blue light, and light-dependent 
pigment formation is inhibited (Fig. 2). The two zygo-
mycetes Mucor circinelloides and P. blakesleeanus dis-
play a much larger variety of WC orthologues than 
N. crassa. P. blakesleeanus contains three WC-1 
proteins along with four WC-2 orthologues, and 
M. circinelloides contains three WC-1 and two WC-2 
proteins16,50. They are structurally similar but have 
distinct functions. In M. circinelloides, one WC-1 pro-
tein controls blue-light-dependent carotenogenesis in 
hyphae, whereas a second one is involved in the photo­
tropic response. Interestingly, phototropism is con-
trolled by blue and by green light, and both responses 
require the blue-light receptor WC-1 (ref.16). In 
P. blakesleeanus, the WC-1 orthologue MADA as well 
as the WC-2 orthologue MADB are involved in both 
carotenogenesis and phototropism50,51.
Another blue-light-perceiving protein family is 
composed of photolyases and cryptochromes52. They 
typically bind FAD with an additional folate or a ribo-
flavin derivative. The chromophores are non-covalently 
bound. Both photolyases and cryptochromes are found 
in fungi, and evidence suggests that they may have a role 
in DNA repair and sexual development53–55; however, the 
signalling mechanisms are still poorly understood.
BLUF proteins were described in bacteria and exist 
in several fungi56. However, mechanistic studies of those 
photoreceptors are still lacking.
Green-light photoreceptors. Green light can be sensed 
by retinal-binding proteins, known as opsins, which are 
found in the retinal rod cells of vertebrates57. Archaea 
and bacteria harbour channel rhodopsins, which are 
seven-transmembrane proteins, and the all-trans-retinal 
form is covalently linked to a lysine residue in the sev-
enth helix of the proteins. The activated protein trans-
locates protons or chloride ions across a membrane58. 
Several amino acids, which can be reversibly proto-
nated, are important for activity. Originally discovered 
in archaea, proton-pumping channel rhodopsins were 
also found in fungi59–62. Three different classes are dis-
tinguished: the first class has a slow photocycle with 
low proton-pumping activity. An example is N. crassa 
NOP-1 (refs60,63,64). The second class is characterized 
by strong green-light-dependent proton-pumping 
activity62. The genomes of many fungi encode further 
opsin-related proteins lacking the lysine residue for 
chromophore binding. The function of this third class 
is still enigmatic65.
Evidence suggests that one of the WC-1 orthologues 
in M. circinelloides is involved in green-light-mediated 
phototropism16. Deletion of the gene encoding WC-1a 
also affected blue-light phototropism, suggesting that 
this WC-1 orthologue may have a role in phototropism 
rather than green-light perception per se.
Red-light and far-red-light photoreceptors. Red-light 
and far-red-light sensing in phytochromes depends on 
a linear tetrapyrrole (bilin), autocatalytically bound 
to the apoprotein via a conserved cysteine residue. 
Phytochromes were discovered in plants, where they are 
well studied66–68. In fungi, this photoreceptor type was 
first discovered in the two model fungi A. nidulans and 
N. crassa69,70. The nature of the bilin chromophore deriv-
ative in fungal phytochromes has yet to be determined, 
although it was shown that A. nidulans FphA is able to 
use biliverdin69,70 (Fig. 3). The chromophores exist in 
two interchangeable conformations that are well distin-
guished by their spectral properties. The Pr form absorbs 
red light, thereby changing the conformation and shift-
ing the absorption maximum into the far-red spectrum; 
this new form is called Pfr. On absorbing far-red light, the 
chromophore reverts to the Pr form. Phytochromes are 
large proteins that consist of a photosensory region with 
a bound chromophore and a signal output domain. The 
sensory region is composed of three domains: the PAS 
domain, the GAF domain and the PHY domain, whereas 
the signal output domain has similarity to prokaryotic 
histidine kinases. It has been speculated that plant phyto­­
chromes have a prokaryotic origin, with an amino termi-
nus from cyanobacteria and a carboxyl terminus from 
proteobacteria71,72. The chromophore is bound to the 
PAS or the GAF domain (Fig. 3).
The crystal structure of the photosensory domain in 
the bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans revealed a very 
unusual deep trefoil knot between the GAF and the PAS 
domains73. As of yet, no structure of any fungal phyto­
chrome has been determined. The signal output region 
is characterized by an ATPase and a histidine kinase 
domain. The histidine in the histidine kinase domain 
can be phosphorylated in bacteria and fungi; the kinase 
activity was lost during evolution in plants, and the histi-
dine was replaced by an arginine or a glutamate. In some 
bacteria and in fungi, another domain is attached to the 
histidine kinase72, which shows similarity to prokaryotic 
response regulator domains and contains an aspartate for 
phosphorylation. As in prokaryotic two-component sys-
tems, a phosphate can be transferred from the histidine 
of the histidine kinase domain to the aspartate of the 
response regulator domain. However, the phosphotrans-
fer has been observed between different phytochrome 
molecules only in vitro74.
Light signalling mechanisms
Different photoreceptors vary considerably in structure 
and locate either to the cytoplasmic membrane (opsins) 
or to the cytoplasm and to nuclei (phytochrome and 
WC proteins). In all photoreceptors, light causes pri-
mary conformational changes of the protein, followed 
Rhodopsins
The photosensors of the retina. 
Rhodopsins contain retinal as a 
chromophore. Rhodopsins are 
also found in lower eukaryotes 
and in archaea.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews

by different output mechanisms, such as control of 
protein–protein interactions or control of phospho-
rylation events leading to different signalling mecha-
nisms. Most light responses ultimately depend on gene 
regulation. For instance, the production of reproduc-
tive, spore-producing structures from simple hyphae 
requires the control of hundreds, or even thousands, 
of genes at specific points in time. This is achieved by 
transcription factors that control certain steps in devel-
opment75. Linking their expression to light control thus 
enables coupling of the entire morphogenetic pathway to 
light7. Likewise, metabolic processes may be controlled 
in a similar manner. Depending on the location of the 
photoreceptor, different signalling cascades are required 
(see below). In addition to their photosensory function, 
it seems that some of the receptors also have a role in 
the dark (Box 1).
Blue-light signalling mechanisms. The mechanism 
of gene activation upon blue-light exposure has been 
studied in great detail. Blue light controls all photo-
responses in N. crassa and also has a role in other fungi 
with a pronounced red-light response8. WC-1 and WC-2 
form a heterodimer (the WCC), bind to the promoters 
of light-activated genes and after illumination activate 
gene expression8. Approximately 400 direct target genes 
of the WCC were identified after 15 minutes of illumina-
tion, many of which encode transcription factors such as 
SUB-1. After this first wave of gene activation, SUB-1 
together with the transcription factor FF-7 (which 
contains a putative O-acetyl transferase domain) and 
the WCC activate downstream genes. Hence, a tran-
scriptional hierarchy controls a large proportion of 
the genome8,76–78 (Fig. 4). The activity of WC-1 and 
WC-2 seems to be regulated through multiple com-
plicated post-translational phosphorylation events79–82. 
In the case of circadian clock regulation, the WCC 
induces the production of the clock protein FRQ, which 
subsequently inhibits the activity of the WCC by recruit-
ing kinases CKI and CKII to phosphorylate and inacti-
vate the WCC, thus providing a negative feedback loop83. 
Protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC) 
also inhibit the activity of the WCC, whereas PP2A 
and PP4 dephosphorylate and activate the WCC81,84,85. 
Recent studies have revealed that light-regulated genes 
are induced in bursts, followed by a period in which the 
promoters are refractory to stimulation86,87.
The WCC also controls gene expression through 
chromatin remodelling. In N. crassa, the WCC binds to 
the promoters of light-regulated genes in the dark and 
interacts with a histone acetyl transferase, NGF-1, which 
is stimulated by the WCC upon illumination. NGF-1 
mediates the acetylation of lysine residue 14 of histone 
H3, which increases the accessibility of genes to RNA 
polymerase II and leads to gene activation88,89. By con-
trast, methylation of lysine 9 and lysine 4 by the methyl-
transferases DIM-5 and SET-1 represses gene expression 
expression. Methylation requires the function of the hetero­
chromatin protein HP-1 (REFS 90,91). In addition to the nuclear 
functions (that is, transcriptional activation and chro-
matin remodelling), evidence suggests that the WCC has 
cytoplasmic functions during circadian clock regulation81. 
Moreover, the regulatory role of the WCC in the circadian 
clock in the absence of light indicates that this complex 
also has a function in the dark92. Similarly, in A. nidulans, 
LreA (the orthologue of WC-1) is required for full 
induction of cleistothecia production in the dark93. 
Finally, in Trichoderma atroviride, the WC-1 orthologue 
Blr-1 seems to control the growth rate of hyphae in the 
dark and seems to be required for starvation-induced 
conidiation94–96.
An important negative regulator of the WC light- 
regulatory system is the VVD protein of N. crassa32,41,97 
(Fig. 2). VVD is a repressor of light-­controlled and 
clock-controlled genes and interacts directly with the 
WCC98. Activated WCC induces the expression of 
vivid, and VVD then inhibits WCC activity by binding 
to the WCC99. Hence, VVD is important for photo-
adaptation34. In addition to WC-1, RCO1 and RCM1, 
the homologues of the co-repressor complex Tup1–
Ssn6 in yeast, are required for the proper induction 
of vivid in response to light and thus indirectly for 
photoadaptation100.
After the discovery of the blue-light-sensing genes 
in N. crassa, these were partially characterized in many 
different fungi51,93,94,101–104. The VVD protein has been 
well studied in Trichoderma reesei (termed ENVOY, 
Env1), but it is not found in all fungi, and the mech-
anisms of photoadaptation in those fungi remain elu-
sive5,65. Although the WC proteins are well conserved, 
studies in A. nidulans point to different regulatory 
cues. Whereas the WCC is bound to the promoter and 
activates gene expression in N. crassa, this complex 
dissociates from the promoter upon illumination in 
A. nidulans105. This could be related to the fact that gene 
activation in A. nidulans primarily depends on phyto­
chrome. The exact mechanism by which the WCC is 
released from the promoters is not clear yet, and it would 
be interesting to determine whether WCC dissocia-
tion from light-activated promoters after illumination 
Box 1 | light sensing as a novel function for old proteins?
evidence suggests that photoreceptor proteins also fulfil functions in the dark and that 
some photoreceptors may also have roles in signalling pathways other than light 
signalling. those non-canonical functions of photoreceptors may shed light on the 
evolution of the sophisticated photoreceptors that exist today. in the case of 
phytochromes, evidence suggests that they developed from histidine hybrid kinases, 
which are typical sensors that respond to specific signals. Hence, light perception could 
have developed as a secondary feature of such a histidine hybrid kinase, and the 
question is what the primary function could have been. it has been suggested that plant 
and bacterial phytochromes are involved in temperature sensing140–143. this mechanism is 
not yet entirely clear, but it is likely that changes in temperature cause conformational 
changes in the phytochrome and thereby initiate a signalling cascade. introduction of 
the bilin chromophore into the protein and a reaction with light could induce the same 
conformational changes as in the case of temperature. similarly, rhodopsin may function 
as a temperature sensor in Drosophila melanogaster144. Hence, temperature sensing 
could be the original function of phytochromes. in agreement with that, it was 
speculated that a bacterial blue-light sensor using FaD (BLuF) protein functions as a 
temperature sensor, and for a plant phototropin, such a function was shown145,146. this 
could point to the possibility that light responses could be properties acquired during 
evolution. it is also well known that the wC proteins have functions in the dark, for 
example, for clock functioning in Neurospora crassa93,96. the clock can be entrained by 
light but also by temperature cycles, and one may speculate that temperature sensing 
was also the ancient function in this case.
FRQ
A negative regulator of the 
circadian clock in fungi. 
Oscillation of transcription of 
clock-controlled genes requires 
the positive element, white 
collar 1 (WC-1), and the 
negative FRQ protein.
Cleistothecia
The fruiting body of 
ascomycetes. Spores are 
produced after meiosis.
Conidiation
The process of the formation of 
vegetative (asexual) spores. 
Usually special morphological 
structures, the conidiophores, 
are produced, which generate 
the conidia.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews

is conserved in other fungi in which phytochromes 
seem to have an important role in light signalling, 
such as Botrytis cinerea or Alternaria alternata.
In comparison, there is very limited evidence for 
signalling related to blue-light perception through the 
photolyase or cryptochrome blue-light receptors53,106. 
The best evidence for a regulatory role comes from work in 
B. cinerea, which develops asexual sclerotia in the dark and 
asexual conidia after illumination with near-ultraviolet 
light (Fig. 2). Blue light inhibits both processes, and one 
cryptochrome (BcCRY2) is required for the blue-light 
repression of conidiation55, whereas it is not required for 
the induction of conidiation with near-ultraviolet light.
Green-light signalling mechanisms. Green-light 
sensing and signalling are much less understood than 
blue-light sensing. There is good evidence that the 
green-light photoreceptor NOP-1 in N. crassa is involved 
in the regulation of developmental processes, possibly 
through the control of the oxidative state of the cell107,108. 
WCC
Acetylated histone
VVD
FRQ
VVD
FRQ
SUB-1
SUB-1
PHY-2
FphA
FphA
?
YpdA
SskA
SskB
PbsB
SakA
SakA
AtfA
GcnE AdaB
H3K9Ac
Nucleus
H3K9
HdaA
CRY
Other
transcription
factors
Other transcription
factors
mRNA
DIM-5
HP-1
Chromatin remodelling
a
Late light response
Gene expression
SET-1
NGF-1
FF-7
b
P
P
P
P
P
P
LreB LreA
LreB LreA
WCC
Early light response
VeA
Fig. 4 | current model of light responses in fungi. a | In Neurospora crassa — and probably in other fungi as well — the 
blue-light response involves a hierarchical expression of light-responsive genes. As a first response, light-activated white 
collar complex (WCC) binds to the promoters of early light-responsive genes and transiently induces their expression. 
WCC interacts with and stimulates the histone acetyl transferase NGF-1; histone acetylation promotes gene expression. 
By contrast, histone methylation by DIM-5, SET-1 and HP-1 represses gene expression. Among the early induced genes are 
frq, vivid and six transcription factor-encoding genes such as sub-1. After the first wave of gene induction, SUB-1 together 
with the transcription factor FF-7 , the WCC and other transcription factors activate the expression of late light-responsive 
genes. Cryptochrome CRY and phytochrome PHY-2 were shown to regulate a small subset of genes. Vivid (VVD) (which is 
encoded by vivid) interacts with the WCC and inactivates it. Therefore, the light-induction does not persist. The 
phenomenon is called photoadaptation. FRQ protein accumulates in a circadian manner and inhibits the activity of the 
WCC rhythmically. Both WCC and FRQ are central elements of the circadian clock. b | In Aspergillus nidulans, red light is 
perceived by the phytochrome FphA. In the cytoplasm, light-dependent activation of FphA probably leads to 
dephosphorylation of the phosphotransferase protein YpdA , causing activation of the high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) 
pathway and, via phosphorelay , activation of the MAP kinase stress-activated kinase (SakA). Phosphorylated SakA shuttles 
into the nucleus to phosphorylate the transcription factor AtfA , which activates gene expression. Chromatin remodelling 
through acetylation of lysine 9 in histone H3 (H3K9Ac) is also involved in light signalling. LreA (the orthologue of WC-1) 
interacts with the histone acetyltransferases GcnE and AdaB and the histone deacetylase HdaA. In the dark , LreA and VeA 
(which is an NF-κB-related master regulator of development and secondary metabolism) are bound to the promoters of 
light-inducible genes. LreA is released from the promoter in light. LreA inhibits GcnE activity and promotes HdaA activity , 
and gene repression is promoted by LreA–LreB–VeA. Following illumination, FphA stimulates GcnE activity , which leads to 
the acetylation of H3K9 and gene expression. However, the interaction between FphA and GcnE and an effect of light on 
GcnE activity have not been verified.
Sclerotia
A multicellular structure used 
for survival of some fungi.  
In Botrytis cinerea, it is the 
prerequisite for sexual fruiting 
body (apothecia) formation.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews

These findings suggest a signalling cascade from the 
membrane-bound protein to the nucleus. However, 
how this is achieved remains unknown. Currently, it is 
difficult to speculate about a signalling cascade because 
the primary action of NOP-1 is not well understood, 
owing to its low proton-pumping activity and because 
it is not coupled to a G protein64. In F. oxysporum, the 
proton-pumping channel rhodopsin, CarO, local-
izes to the plasma and internal membranes, and the 
light-activated protein contributes to the generation 
of a membrane potential or controls the ionic balance 
of the cell109. There is evidence that CarO retards spore 
germination in light. This effect resembles the role 
of phytochrome in A. nidulans and A. fumigatus13,20. 
It is probably advantageous that spores germinate after 
sunset when humidity increases at night.
It has been hypothesized that changes in the pH gradi-
ent trigger a signalling cascade through the well-studied 
pH signalling pathway110. Interestingly, these opsins, 
like CarO, seem to be present in only plant-interacting 
fungi109. In the pathogenic fungus Colletotrichum 
gloeosporioides, it was shown that pH-controlled genes 
are required for colonization111. Such genes are under the 
control of the PacC transcription factor and were acti-
vated under alkaline conditions. The light-dependent 
activation of opsin should lead to an acidification of 
the microenvironment at the cytoplasmic membrane. 
Hence, during the day, when the opsin is activated, col-
onization of the host could be reduced. Another effect of 
proton pumping by opsins is the generation of a mem-
brane potential, which could be important for uptake 
processes, and thus the nutritional status may change in 
the dark or upon mutation of the opsin function.
An interesting case of green-light signalling was 
observed in Blastocladiella emersonii. This chytrid fun-
gus is characterized by motile zoospores that exhibit a 
phototactic swimming behaviour. In this case, rhodopsin 
is fused with a guanylyl-cyclase catalytic domain. Upon 
light stimulation, the enzyme is activated and produces 
cGMP as a second messenger. cGMP levels control ion 
channels and thereby membrane polarization112,113. This, 
in turn, modulates Ca2+ homeostasis and most likely 
controls the behaviour of the flagellum.
Red-light signalling mechanisms. Red-light and 
phytochrome signalling have been mainly studied in 
A. nidulans, A. fumigatus and B. cinerea3,4. Some major 
phenomena controlled by red light in A. nidulans are the 
balance between asexual and sexual development and 
the germination process20,69. Phytochromes were charac-
terized by reverse genetics after their discovery in bacte-
ria and the identification of partial sequences in fungal 
genome projects69,70,114. Similar to blue-light signalling via 
the WC proteins, a phytochrome-dependent signalling 
cascade could be very short because red light also pene-
trates the cytoplasm and reaches the nucleus. However, 
phytochrome does not contain features of a transcrip-
tional regulator69, but although the protein was found 
in the cytoplasm, interaction studies clearly showed the 
occurrence of a nuclear fraction. The A. nidulans phyto­
chrome contains two nuclear localization signals93, but 
there is no evidence yet for light-dependent shuttling 
of the protein as described for plant phytochromes115. 
In A. nidulans, the phytochrome FphA interacts in the 
nucleus with both the WCC and an NF-κB-related mas-
ter regulator of development and secondary metabo-
lism, VeA93,116,117. In addition, it was reported that FphA 
interacts with chromatin-remodelling enzymes, such as 
histone deacetylases and histone acetyltransferases105 
(Fig. 4b). The role of the protein interactions and whether 
light induces those interactions remain elusive. In addi-
tion to those interactions in the nucleus, there is recent 
evidence that the cytoplasmic fraction of phytochrome 
is crucial for red-light signalling. In a mutant screen-
ing for mutants that do not respond to red light (blind 
mutant), the MAP kinase stress-activated kinase(SakA; 
also known as HogA) was identified as a possible signal-
ling factor downstream of red-light sensing11 (Figs 4b,5). 
The high osmolarity glycerol pathway (HOG pathway) 
(which regulates the hyperosmotic stress response) 
consists of a two-component signalling module and 
a MAP kinase module. It was shown that the cascade 
was activated at the level of the phosphotransfer pro-
tein YpdA. The phosphorylation status of YpdA triggers 
downstream signalling, but it is not entirely clear how 
YpdA is controlled by FphA. FphA harbours an active 
histidine kinase, the activity of which is stimulated by 
light, suggesting that the protein could phosphorylate 
target proteins74. By contrast, it was shown that purified 
FphA can accept a phosphate from YpdA118. The aspar-
tate residue in the response regulator domain of FphA 
was crucial for the reaction, whereas the histidine resi-
due was not required. In vivo, it was shown that both the 
histidine residue of the histidine kinase domain and the 
aspartate residue of the response regulator domain were 
essential for phytochrome activity105. One possibility is 
that histidine phosphorylation is required to expose the 
response regulator in a way that it can be phosphoryl-
ated by YpdA. Histidine phosphorylation of FphA may 
also enable other proteins to interact with FphA and, for 
example, dephosphorylate the aspartate in the response 
regulator domain.
N. crassa harbours two phytochromes (PHY-1 and 
PHY-2), and PHY-2 may modulate the activity of the 
WCC, is upregulated during sexual development and is 
involved in the control of the expression of early sexual 
developmental genes70,107,119. This points to a complex 
regulatory network in N. crassa, as found in A. nidu-
lans. A. fumigatus also contains two phytochromes13, and 
similarly to A. nidulans, one of them seems to control 
germination, surprisingly, in the dark. In contrast to 
A. nidulans, asexual sporulation in A. fumigatus does 
not require red light and thus does not necessitate a 
phytochrome13,120.
The two fungi B. cinerea and A. alternata also 
react to red light, suggesting that they harbour func-
tional phytochromes4,121,122. Interestingly, whereas the 
genome of A. alternata encodes one phytochrome, 
the genome of B. cinerea was found to encode three 
phytochromes. However, the exact functions of the phyto­
chromes and the interplay with other light-sensing 
systems need to be further investigated. B. cinerea con-
tains 11 putative photoreceptor proteins for different 
wavelengths4.
High osmolarity glycerol 
pathway
(HOG pathway). A signalling 
pathway that is required for 
the adaptation of yeast and 
other organisms to high 
osmolarity conditions.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews

Light, stress and development
Fungi may use light – perhaps in combination with a 
circadian clock – to adapt to stressful conditions and for 
orientation in the environment to produce reproductive 
structures at the right place and the right time1 (Fig. 2). 
As, for example, the production of spore-producing 
structures may depend on many internal and external 
factors, such as the nutritional status of the fungus, salt 
concentration in the environment or the availability of 
a mating partner, it is clear that light is only one of the 
parameters that need to be integrated to regulate biologi­
cal processes under distinct conditions. This raises the 
question of how the light-sensing pathways or molecules 
are interlinked with stress signalling or developmental 
pathways. Such a link seems apparent for ultraviolet 
light stress, which causes DNA damage. The damage 
is repaired by photolyases, which are activated by blue 
light56,123. The WCC may also be connected to DNA 
damage repair through an endonuclease; for example, 
in Cryptococcus neoformans, it was shown that the WCC 
controls the expression of the Uve1 endonuclease124. 
Spores of the insect pathogenic fungus Metarhizium 
robertsii were less sensitive to ultraviolet-B light when 
grown under continuous visible light125, further provid-
ing evidence that light signalling and the DNA damage 
repair pathways are coordinated.
A link between light and stress signalling was dis-
covered in B. cinerea and A. nidulans11 (Figs 4,5). In 
B. cinerea, deletion of one of the three phytochromes 
led to increased sensitivity to cell wall stress126. In 
A. nidulans, it was found that the red-light signal ini-
tiates the HOG pathway via the phosphotransfer pro-
tein YpdA. However, it remains to be shown whether 
phytochrome signalling occurs exclusively via the 
HOG pathway or whether phytochromes control gene 
expression independent of the MAP kinase SakA and 
vice versa. Furthermore, in Beauveria bassiana, it was 
found that phytochrome regulates multi-stress responses 
in the fungus and that key proteins in the HOG path-
way are transcriptionally modulated by activated phyto­
chrome. Interestingly, resistance against osmotic stress 
was shown to be decreased in a phytochrome mutant, 
whereas the mutant strain was more tolerant towards 
oxidative stress127. In addition to phytochromes, 
A. nidulans and other filamentous fungi contain almost 
20 putative sensory histidine kinases but only one more 
phosphotransfer protein besides YpdA118,128. What the 
other input signals are and how they are integrated 
are largely unknown, but the existence of other sen-
sors suggests a much more complex situation than the 
one in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has only one 
osmosensor kinase.
Similarly, WC-dependent blue-light signalling is con-
nected to stress signalling10. In T. atroviride, light upreg-
ulates the expression of at least two genes of the HOG 
pathway, and light induces phosphorylation of the 
HOG MAP kinase Tmk3. Phosphorylation of the MAP 
kinase did not occur in a wc-1 (blr-1) mutant. This example 
suggests two layers of regulation: a fast one involving 
post-translational modification of the MAP kinase and 
a slower regulatory pathway through the transcriptional 
upregulation of components of the HOG pathway. 
However, not all light-responsive genes required Tmk3 
for their expression10.
The coupling of light with stress responses was found 
for Env1, the VVD orthologue in T. reesei5. In this case, 
one cysteine residue in the LOV domain of VVD is 
required for flavin binding, and a second one responds 
to oxidative stress97.
The HOG pathway is also linked to the Ca2+ signal-
ling pathway, which is a second stress-activated sig-
nalling module. In A. fumigatus, some genes encoding 
proteins of the HOG pathway are direct targets for the 
central transcription factor of this pathway, CrzA129. 
In addition, it could be that the HOG pathway sig-
nals into the Ca2+ signalling pathway, which could link 
light sensing to polar growth. It was shown that light 
delays germination and reduces the growth rate of 
WCC
Aspergillus nidulans
Aspergillus
nidulans
Trichoderma
reesei
Aspergillus
fumigatus
Neurospora
crassa
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
• Circadian clock
   (Neurospora crassa)
• Blue-light signal
   (Trichoderma atroviride)
Blue light
Blue light
Red light
H2O2
Ca2+
Circadian clock
Light-
regulated
proteins
• G protein signalling
• Pheromone response
• PKA activity
• cAMP pathway
ROS
FphA
Other histidine
kinases
CrzA
Msn2
Crz1
Other environmental cues
YpdA
SskA
Env1
HOG and
MAP kinase
pathway
Ca2+
AtfA
FRQ
Fig. 5 | links between light signalling pathways and other cellular pathways.  
In Aspergillus nidulans, red-light signalling via the phytochrome FphA requires the high 
osmolarity glycerol (HOG) MAP kinase pathway to transmit the light signal into the 
nucleus, where the AtfA transcription factor activates light-inducible genes. The HOG 
pathway is the central stress signalling module and is required for sensing of oxidative 
(reactive oxygen species (ROS)) or osmotic stress. In addition to FphA , different hybrid 
histidine kinases control the phosphorylation status of YpdA and thus signalling via the 
HOG pathway. In Aspergillus fumigatus, it was shown that the Ca2+ concentration affects 
the expression level of SskB (not shown). CrzA is the orthologue of the Crz1 transcription 
factor of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Thus, Ca2+ signalling seems to be interlinked with 
light and stress signalling. In S. cerevisiae, which lacks photoreceptor proteins, blue light 
can cause an increase of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), which in turn induces downstream 
signalling processes through the transcription factor Msn2. Blue light also activates 
the Crz1 transcription factor in a Ca2+–calcineurin-dependent, but protein kinase A 
(PKA)-independent, manner. Thus, light leads to gene induction even in the absence  
of photoreceptors. This mechanism could also be active in other fungi that contain 
photoreceptors. Blue-light signalling has been studied best in Neurospora crassa but also 
in Trichoderma atroviride and Trichoderma reesei. The white collar complex (WCC) 
induces light-regulated genes, including the frq gene. The FRQ protein is the negative 
element and the WCC the positive element in the N. crassa circadian clock system. 
The clock system and blue-light signalling are also interlinked with the HOG pathway. 
In T. reesei, a role of the blue-light receptor Env1 (the VVD orthologue) in controlling 
metabolic pathways through different signalling pathways has been unravelled.
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews

hyphae and that Ca2+ is important for the coordination 
of actin polymerization and vesicle secretion13,20,130,131. 
Furthermore, in T. reesei, Env1 controls cAMP levels, 
which could provide another link between blue light 
and polar growth132,133.
It seems that fungi can also perceive light and adapt 
to stressful conditions without the described photo-
receptors134,135. In S. cerevisiae, a peroxisomal oxidase 
converts blue light into hydrogen peroxide, which 
is transduced by the peroxiredoxin Tsa1 to cyto-
solic thioredoxin. Oxidized thioredoxin represses the 
PKA-dependent phosphorylation of Msn2, enabling 
nuclear accumulation of the general stress response 
transcription factor Msn2, which affects gene expres-
sion136. In addition, blue light can activate the tran-
scription factor Crz1 in a Ca2+–calcineurin-dependent, 
but PKA-independent, manner. It is likely that similar 
mechanisms exist in filamentous fungi as well.
Light also controls developmental decisions of 
the mycelium. Two examples are A. nidulans and 
T. atroviride7,94 (Fig. 2).The formation of reproductive struc-
tures in response to light requires reprogramming of the 
cells and is another example of how light can be transmit-
ted into differential gene expression17,75. It was shown that 
central regulators of asexual development of A. nidulans 
are controlled by light7. One of the regulators is VeA116,117. 
VeA interacts with FphA, and the activity of VeA is con-
trolled through multiple phosphorylation events93,137,138. 
However, there is currently no evidence that those phos-
phorylation events are mediated by FphA, and it remains 
to be elucidated how the light-sensing machinery and 
transcription of developmental genes by VeA are linked.
Future perspectives and conclusions
Fungal photoreceptors and connected signalling cas-
cades have been described in recent years, and an unex-
pected complexity has emerged. However, our current 
knowledge does not yet allow us to present a unified 
picture of light signalling in fungi. One major disad-
vantage may be our limited knowledge of the biology 
of fungi, as most molecular analyses are restricted to 
laboratory conditions. Therefore, the role of photo­
receptors may be overlooked or misinterpreted, as in the 
case of the two phytochromes in N. crassa or the role of 
opsin-related proteins. For opsins with proton-pumping 
activity, it remains unknown how they might control 
developmental or other morphogenetic pathways.
One question that arises is relevance of the number 
of photoreceptors present in one fungus. All the light 
effects described thus far could be fulfilled with just one 
photoreceptor to perceive the light signal. Why then 
would fungi need to see different colours or have up 
to 11 photoreceptors, as does, for example, B. cinerea, 
which contains 6 blue-light receptors, 2 opsins and 3 
phytochromes2? As stress adaptation and reproduction 
are such important processes, one possibility is that 
the use of different photosystems is advantageous in 
evolution and provides backup systems. However, it is 
possible that the lack of our understanding of this com-
plexity may again be due to our limited knowledge of 
the biology of fungi. For instance, phytochrome signals 
not only indicate a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ in regard to inducing 
a certain biological programme; the ratio between the 
Pr and the Pfr forms of phytochrome provides informa-
tion about the time of the day, as the spectral properties 
change throughout the day. Perhaps that is important 
for competing in nature. The use of different photo­
receptors is also useful in different habitats. For example, 
in forest canopy environments, green light dominates, 
and hence, many plant pathogenic fungi seem to have 
functional opsin proteins108. Likewise, it has been 
shown that red light penetrates soil deeper than blue 
light139. Moreover, it seems that photoreceptors are 
under constant pressure to evolve. For example, all 
photoreceptors seem to have undergone gene duplica-
tions in certain fungi, enabling them to fulfil slightly 
different functions, such as the two phytochromes in 
N. crassa or the WC orthologues in P. blakesleeanus and 
M. circinelloides. Furthermore, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum 
was shown to have three phytochromes, although one 
of those lacks the crucial histidine residue and thus may 
not exhibit kinase activity.
Fungi such as B. cinerea, A. alternata and A. nidulans, 
in which all photoreceptors seem to fulfil some functions 
under laboratory conditions, seem to be appropriate 
models for future analyses.
Published online xx xx xxxx
1.	
Fuller, K. K., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. Fungal 
photobiology: visible light as a signal for stress, space 
and time. Curr. Genet. 61, 275–288 (2015).
2.	
Dasgupta, A., Fuller, K. K., Dunlap, J. C. & Loros, J. J. 
Seeing the world differently: variability in the 
photosensory mechanisms of two model fungi. 
Environ. Microbiol. 18, 5–20 (2015).
3.	
Fischer, R., Aguirre, J., Herrera-Estrella, A. & 
Corrochano, L. M. The complexity of fungal vision. 
Microbiol. Spectr. https://doi.org/10.1128/
microbiolspec.FUNK-0020-2016 (2016).
4.	
Schumacher, J. How light affects the life of Botrytis. 
Fungal Genet. Biol. 106, 26–41 (2017).
5.	
Schmoll, M. Light, stress, sex and carbon – the 
photoreceptor ENVOY as a central checkpoint in the 
physiology of Trichoderma reesei. Fungal Biol. 122, 
479–486 (2018).
6.	
Riquelme, M. et al. Fungal morphogenesis: from the 
polarized growth of hyphae to complex reproduction 
and infection structures. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 82, 
e00068–17 (2018).
7.	
Ruger-Herreros, C. et al. Regulation of conidiation by 
light in Aspergillus nidulans. Genetics 188, 809–822 
(2011).
8.	
Chen, C. H., Ringelberg, C. S., Gross, R. H., Dunlap, J. C. 
& Loros, J. J. Genome-wide analysis of light-inducible 
responses reveals hierarchical light signalling in 
Neurospora. EMBO J. 28, 1029–1042 (2009).
9.	
Rosales-Saavedra, T. et al. Novel light-regulated  
genes in Trichoderma atroviride: a dissection by  
cDNA microarrays. Microbiology 152, 3305–3317 
(2006).
10.	 Esquivel-Naranjo, E. U. et al. A Trichoderma atroviride 
stress-activated MAPK pathway integrates stress and 
light signals. Mol. Microbiol. 100, 860–876 (2016).
11.	 Yu, Z., Armant, O. & Fischer, R. Fungi use the SakA 
(HogA) pathway for phytochrome-dependent light 
signaling. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16019 (2016).  
This paper presents the discovery of the link 
between red-light signalling and the HOG pathway.
12.	 Atoui, A. et al. Cross-talk between light and glucose 
regulation controls toxin production and morphogenesis 
in Aspergillus nidulans. Fungal Genet. Biol. 47,  
962–972 (2010).
13.	 Fuller, K. K., Ringelberg, C. S., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. 
The fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus regulates 
growth, metabolism, and stress resistance in response 
to light. mBio 4, e00142–13 (2013).
14.	 Schmoll, M., Schuster, A., Silva Rdo, N. & Kubicek, C. P. 
The G-alpha protein GNA3 of Hypocrea jecorina 
(Anamorph Trichoderma reesei) regulates cellulase 
gene expression in the presence of light. Eukaryot. 
Cell 8, 410–420 (2009).
15.	 Bayram, O. et al. Changes of global gene expression 
and secondary metabolite accumulation during 
light-dependent Aspergillus nidulans development. 
Fungal Genet. Biol. 87, 30–53 (2016).
16.	 Silva, F., Torres-Martinez, S. & Garre, V. Distinct 
white collar-1 genes control specific light responses in 
Mucor circinelloides. Mol. Microbiol. 61, 1023–1037 
(2006).
17.	 Mooney, J. L. & Yager, L. N. Light is required for 
conidiation in Aspergillus nidulans. Genes Dev. 4, 
1473–1482 (1990).
18.	 Kües, U. et al. The A mating type and blue light 
regulate all known differentiation processes in the 
basidiomycete Coprinus cinereus. Mol. Gen. Genet. 
260, 81–91 (1998).
19.	 Grünbacher, A. et al. Six hydrophobins are involved in 
hydrophobin rodlet formation in Aspergillus nidulans 
and contribute to hydrophobicity of the spore surface. 
PLOS ONE 9, e94546 (2014).
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews

20.	 Röhrig, J., Kastner, C. & Fischer, R. Light inhibits spore 
germination through phytochrome in Aspergillus 
nidulans. Curr. Genet. 59, 55–62 (2013).
21.	 Duran, R., Cary, J. W. & Calvo, A. M. Role of the 
osmotic stress regulatory pathway in morphogenesis 
and secondary metabolism in fialmentous fungi. Toxins 
2, 367–381 (2010).
22.	 Dunlap, J. C. & Loros, J. J. Making time: conservation 
of biological clocks from fungi to animals. Microbiol. 
Spectr. https://doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.FUNK-
0039-2016 (2017).
23.	 Montenegro-Montero, A., Canessa, P. & Larrondo, L. F. 
Around the fungal clock: recent advances in the 
molecular study of circadian clocks in Neurospora and 
other fungi. Adv. Genet. 92, 107–184 (2015).
24.	 Lee, K., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. Interconnected 
feedback loops in the Neurospora circadian system. 
Science 290, 277 (2000).
25.	 Arpaia, G., Loros, J. J., Dunlap, J. C., Morelli, G. & 
Macino, G. The interplay of light and the circadian 
clock. Independent dual regulation of clock-controlled 
gene ccg-2 (eas). Plant Physiol. 102, 1299–1305 
(1993).
26.	 Cohen, R. & Delbrück, M. Photo-reactions in 
Phycomyces; growth and tropic responses to the 
stimulation of narrow test areas. J. Gen. Physiol. 42, 
677–695 (1959).
27.	 Corrochano, L. M. & Galland, P. in The Mycota: Growth, 
differentiation and sexuality (ed. Wendland, J.)  
235–256 (Springer, 2016).
28.	 O’Hara, A. & Jenkins, J. I. In vivo function of 
tryptophans in the Arabidopsis UV-B photoreceptor 
UVR8. Plant Cell 24, 3755–3766 (2012).
29.	 Losi, A. & Gärtner, W. The evolution of flavin-binding 
photoreceptors: an ancient chromophore serving 
trendy blue-light sensors. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 63, 
49–72 (2012).
30.	 Pfeifer, A. et al. Time-resolved Fourier transform 
infrared study on photoadduct formation and 
secondary structural changes within the phototropin 
LOV domain. Biophys. J. 96, 1462–1470 (2009).
31.	 Crosson, S. & Moffat, K. Photoexcited structure of a 
plant photoreceptor domain reveals a light-driven 
molecular switch. Plant Cell 14, 1067–1075 (2002).
32.	 Heintzen, C., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. The PAS 
protein VIVID defines a clock-associated feedback loop 
that represses light input, modulates gating, and 
regulates clock resetting. Cell 104, 453–464 (2001).
33.	 Zoltowski, B. D. et al. Conformational switching in the 
fungal light sensor Vivid. Science 316, 1054–1057 
(2007).  
This is the first study to report the crystal structure 
of the LOV domain-containing protein VVD.
34.	 Dasgupta, A. et al. Biological significance of 
photoreceptor photocycle length: VIVID photocycle 
governs the dynamic VIVID-White Collar Complex pool 
mediating photo-adaptation and response to changes 
in light intensity. PLOS Genet. 11, e1005215 (2015).
35.	 Zoltowski, B. D., Vaccaro, B. & Crane, B. R. 
Mechanism-based tuning of a LOV domain 
photoreceptor. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5, 827–834 (2009).
36.	 Zoltowski, B. D. & Crane, B. R. Light activation of the 
LOV protein vivid generates a rapidly exchanging 
dimer. Biochemistry 47, 7012–7019 (2008).
37.	 Vaidya, A. T., Chen, C. H., Dunlap, J. C., Loros, J. J.  
& Crane, B. R. Structure of a light-activated LOV 
protein dimer that regulates transcription. Sci. Signal. 
4, ra50 (2011).
38.	 Lee, C. T., Malzahn, E., Brunner, M. & Mayer, M. P. 
Light-induced differences in conformational dynamics 
of the circadian clock regulator VIVID. J. Mol. Biol. 
426, 601–610 (2014).
39.	 Ganguly, A., Thiel, W. & Crane, B. R. Glutamine amide 
flip elicits long distance allosteric responses in the lov 
protein VIVID. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 2972–2980 
(2017).
40.	 Schwerdtfeger, C. & Linden, H. Blue light adaptation 
and desensitization of light signal transduction in 
Neurospora crassa. Mol. Microbiol. 39, 1080–1087 
(2001).
41.	 Schwerdtfeger, C. & Linden, H. VIVID is a flavoprotein 
and serves as a fungal blue light photoreceptor for 
photoadaptation. EMBO J. 22, 4846–4855 (2003).
42.	 Ballario, P. et al. White collar-1, a central regulator of 
blue light responses in Neurospora crassa, is a zinc 
finger protein. EMBO J. 15, 1650–1657 (1996).  
This is the first study first to clone the 
photoreceptor gene.
43.	 Froehlich, A. C., Liu, Y., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. 
White collar-1, a circadian blue light photoreceptor, 
binding to the frequency promoter. Science 297, 
815–819 (2002).
44.	 He, Q. et al. White collar-1, a DNA binding 
transcription factor and a light sensor. Science 297, 
840–843 (2002).  
References 43 and 44 show the breakthrough 
discovery of the chromophore attached to the 
photoreceptor, which is a transcription factor.
45.	 Cheng, P., He, Q., Yang, Y., Wang, L. & Liu, Y. 
Functional conservation of light, oxygen, or voltage 
domains in light sensing. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
100, 5938–5943 (2003).
46.	 Wang, B., Zhou, X., Loros, J. J. & Dunlap, J. C. 
Alternative use of DNA binding domains by the 
Neurospora white collar complex dictates circadian 
regulation and light responses. Mol. Cell. Biol. 36, 
781–793 (2016).
47.	 Linden, H. & Macino, G. White collar 2, a partner in 
blue-light signal transduction, controlling expression 
of light-regulated genes in Neurospora crassa. EMBO J. 
16, 98–109 (1997).
48.	 Schwerdtfeger, C. & Linden, H. Localization and 
light-dependent phosphorylation of white collar 1  
and 2, the two central components of blue light 
signaling in Neurospora crassa. Eur. J. Biochem. 267, 
414–421 (2000).
49.	 Cheng, P., Yang, Y., Wang, L., He, Q. & Liu, Y.  
WHITE COLLAR-1, a multifunctional Neurospora 
protein involved in the circadian feedback loops, light 
sensing, and transcription repression of wc-2. J. Biol. 
Chem. 278, 3801–3808 (2003).
50.	 Sanz, C. et al. Phycomyces MADB interacts with 
MADA to form the primary photoreceptor complex for 
fungal phototropism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106, 
7095–7100 (2009).
51.	 Idnurm, A. et al. The Phycomyces madA gene encodes 
a blue-light photoreceptor for phototropism and other 
light responses. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103, 
4546–4551 (2006).
52.	 Sancar, A. Structure and function of DNA photolyase 
and cryptochrome blue light-photoreceptors. Chem. 
Rev. 103, 2203–2237 (2003).
53.	 Bayram, Ö., Biesemann, C., Krappmann, S., Galland, P. 
& Braus, G. H. More than a repair enzyme: Aspergillus 
nidulans photolyase-like CryA is a regulator of sexual 
development. Mol. Biol. Cell 19, 3254–3262 (2008).
54.	 Berrocal-Tito, G. M., Esquivel-Naranjo, E. U.,  
Horwitz, B. A. & Herrera-Estrella, A. Trichoderma 
atroviride PHR1, a fungal photolyase responsible for 
DNA repair, autoregulates its own photoinduction. 
Eukaryot. Cell 6, 1682–1692 (2007).
55.	 Cohrs, K. C. & Schumacher, J. The two cryptochrome/
photolyase family proteins fulfill distinct roles in DNA 
photorepair and regulation of conidiation in the gray 
mold fungus Botrytis cinerea. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 83, e00812–17 (2017).
56.	 Brych, A. et al. White collar 1-induced photolyase 
expression contributes to UV-tolerance of Ustilago 
maydis. MicrobiologyOpen 5, 224–243 (2016).
57.	 Scheerer, P. et al. Crystal structure of opsin in its 
G-protein-interacting conformation. Nature 455, 
497–502 (2008).
58.	 Spudich, J. L. The multitalented microbial sensory 
rhodopsins. Trends Microbiol. 14, 480–487 (2006).
59.	 Bieszke, J. A. et al. The nop-1 gene of Neurospora 
crassa encodes a seven transmembrane helix retinal- 
binding protein homologous to archaeal rhodopsins. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 8034–8039 (1999).
60.	 Bieszke, J. A., Spudich, E. N., Scott, K. L.,  
Borkovich, K. A. & Spudich, J. L. A eukaryotic  
protein, NOP-1, binds retinal to form an archaeal 
rhodopsin-like photochemically reactive pigment. 
Biochemistry 38, 14138–14145 (1999).
61.	 Ernst, O. P. et al. Microbial and animal rhodopsins: 
structures, functions and molecular mechanisms. 
Chem. Rev. 114, 126–163 (2014).
62.	 Waschuk, S. A., Bezerra, A. G. J., Shi, L. & Brown, L. S. 
Leptosphaeria rhodopsin: bacteriorhodopsin-like 
proton pump from a eukaryote. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 102, 6879–6883 (2005).
63.	 Brown, L. S., Dioumaev, A. K., Lanyi, J. K., Spudich, E. N. 
& Spudich, J. L. Photochemical reaction cycle and 
proton transfer in Neurospora rhodopsin. J. Biol. 
Chem. 276, 32495–32505 (2001).
64.	 Chow, B. Y. et al. High-performance genetically 
targetable optical neural silencing by light-driven 
proton pumps. Nature 463, 98–102 (2010).
65.	 Rodriguez-Romero, J., Hedtke, M., Kastner, C., Müller, S. 
& Fischer, R. Fungi, hidden in soil or up in the air: light 
makes a difference. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 64, 585–510 
(2010).
66.	 Smith, H. Phytochromes and light signal perception  
by plants — an emerging synthesis. Nature 407, 
585–591 (2000).
67.	 Inoue, K., Nishihama, R. & Kohchi, T. Evolutionary 
origin of phytochrome responses and signaling in land 
plants. Plant Cell Environ. 40, 2502–2508 (2017).
68.	 Rockwell, N. C., Su, Y. S. & Lagarias, J. C. 
Phytochrome structure and signaling mechanisms. 
Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 57, 837–858 (2006).
69.	 Blumenstein, A. et al. The Aspergillus nidulans 
phytochrome FphA represses sexual development in 
red light. Curr. Biol. 15, 1833–1838 (2005).
70.	 Froehlich, A. C., Noh, B., Vierstra, R. D., Loros, J.  
& Dunlap, J. C. Genetic and molecular analysis of 
phytochromes from the filamentous fungus 
Neurospora crassa. Eukaryot. Cell 4, 2140–2152 
(2005).  
References 69 and 70 are the first to characterize 
the fungal phytochromes.
71.	 Buchberger, T. & Lamparter, T. Streptophyte 
phytochromes exhibit an N-terminus of cyanobacterial 
origin and a C-terminus of proteobacterial origin.  
BMC Res. Notes 8, 1–13 (2015).
72.	 Li, F. W. et al. Phytochrome diversity in green plants 
and the origin of canonical plant phytochromes.  
Nat. Commun. 6, 7852 (2015).
73.	 Wagner, J. R., Brunzelle, J. S., Forest, K. T. &  
Vierstra, R. D. A light-sensing knot revealed by the 
structure of the chromophore-binding domain of 
phytochrome. Nature 438, 325–331 (2005).  
This is the first study to report the crystal structure 
of the photosensory domain of a phytochrome.
74.	 Brandt, S., von Stetten, D., Günther, M., Hildebrandt, P. 
& Frankenberg-Dinkel, N. The fungal phytochrome 
FphA from Aspergillus nidulans. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 
34605–34614 (2008).
75.	 Adams, T. H., Wieser, J. K. & Yu, J.-H. Asexual 
sporulation in Aspergillus nidulans. Microbiol. Mol. 
Biol. Rev. 62, 35–54 (1998).
76.	 Smith, K. M. et al. Transcription factors in light and 
circadian clock signaling networks revealed by 
genomewide mapping of direct targets for Neurospora 
white collar complex. Eukaryot. Cell 9, 1549–1556 
(2010).
77.	 Wu, C. et al. Genome-wide characterization of 
light-regulated genes in Neurospora crassa. 
G3 (Bethesda) 4, 1731–1745 (2014).
78.	 Sancar, C. et al. Combinatorial control of light induced 
chromatin remodeling and gene activation in 
Neurospora. PLOS Genet. 11, e1005105 (2015).
79.	 He, Q. & Liu, Y. Molecular mechanism of light 
responses in Neurospora: from light-induced 
transcription to photoadaptation. Genes Dev. 19, 
2888–2899 (2005).
80.	 Schafmeier, T., Kaldi, K., Diernfellner, A., Mohr, C.  
& Brunner, M. Phosphorylation-dependent maturation 
of Neurospora circadian clock protein from a nuclear 
repressor toword a cytoplasmic activator. Genes Dev. 
20, 297–306 (2005).
81.	 Cha, J., Chang, S. S., Huang, G., Cheng, P. & Liu, Y. 
Control of WHITE COLLAR localization by 
phosphorylation is a critical step in the circadian 
negative feedback process. EMBO J. 27, 3246–3255 
(2008).  
This study reports the detailed mechanism of light 
activation through the WCC.
82.	 Talora, C., Franchi, L., Linden, H., Ballario, P.  
& Macino, G. Role of a white collar-1-white collar-2 
complex in blue-light signal transduction. EMBO J. 
18, 4961–4968 (1999).
83.	 He, Q. et al. CKI and CKII mediate the frequency- 
dependent phosphorylation of the WHITE COLLAR 
complex to close the Neurospora circadian negative 
feedback loop. Genes Dev. 20, 2552–2565 (2006).
84.	 Huang, G. et al. Protein kinase A and casein kinases 
mediate sequential phosphorylation events in the 
circadian negative feedback loop. Genes Dev. 21, 
3283–3295 (2007).
85.	 Schafmeier, T. et al. Transcriptional feedback of 
Neurospora circadian clock gene by phosphorylation- 
dependent inactivation of its transcription factor. Cell 
122, 235–246 (2005).
86.	 Cesbron, F., Oehler, M., Ha, N., Sancar, G. & Brunner, M. 
Transcriptional refractoriness is dependent on core 
promoter architecture. Nat. Commun. 6, 6753 
(2015).
87.	 Li, C., Cesbron, F., Oehler, M., Brunner, M. & Höfer, T. 
Frequency modulation of transcriptional bursting 
enables sensitive and rapid gene regulation. Cell Syst. 
25, 409–423.e11 (2018).
88.	 Brenna, A., Grimaldi, B., Filetici, P. & Ballario, P. 
Physical association of the WC-1 photoreceptor and 
the histone acetyltransferase NGF-1 is required for 
blue light signal transduction in Neurospora crassa. 
Mol. Biol. Cell 23, 3863–3872 (2012).
Nature Reviews | Microbiology
Reviews

89.	 Grimaldi, B. et al. The Neurospora crassa White 
Collar-1 dependent bluit light response requires 
acetylation of histone H3 lysine 14 by NGF-1.  
Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 4576–4583 (2006).
90.	 Ruesch, C. E. et al. The histone H3 lysine 9 
methyltransferase DIM-5 modifies chromatin at 
frequency and represses light-activated gene 
expression. G3 (Bethesda) 5, 93–101 (2014).
91.	 Raduwan, H., Isola, A. L. & Belden, W. J.  
Methylation of histone H3 on lysine 4 by the  
lysine methyltransferase SET1 protein is needed for 
normal clock gene expression. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 
8380–8390 (2013).
92.	 Hurley, J. M. et al. Analysis of clock-regulated genes in 
Neurospora reveals widespread posttranscriptional 
control of metabolic potential. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 111, 16995–17002 (2014).
93.	 Purschwitz, J. et al. Functional and physical interaction 
of blue and red-light sensors in Aspergillus nidulans. 
Curr. Biol. 18, 255–259 (2008).
94.	 Casas-Flores, S., Rios-Momberg, M., Bibbins, M., 
Ponce-Noyola, P. & Herrera-Estrella, A. BLR-1 and 
BLR-2, key regulatory elements of photoconidiation 
and mycelial growth in Trichoderma atroviride. 
Microbiology 150, 3561–3569 (2004).
95.	 Casas-Flores, S. et al. Cross talk between a fungal 
blue-light perception system and the cyclic AMP 
signaling pathway. Eukaryot. Cell 5, 499–506  
(2006).
96.	 Sánchez-Arrguín, A., Pérez-Martínez, A. S. & 
Herrera-Estrella, A. Proteomic analysis of Trichoderma 
atroviride reveals independent roles for transcription 
factors BLR-1 and BLR-2 in light and darkness. 
Eukaryot. Cell 11, 30–41 (2012).
97.	 Lokhandwala, J. et al. Structural biochemistry of a 
fungal LOV domain photoreceptor reveals an 
evolutionarily conserved pathway integrating light and 
oxidative stress. Structure 23, 116–125 (2015).  
This study reports the link between light and stress.
98.	 Chen, C. H., DeMay, B. S., Gladfelter, A. S., Dunlap, J. C. 
& Loros, J. J. Physical interraction between VIVID  
and white collar complex regulates photoadaptation  
in Neurospora. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 
16715–16720 (2010).
99.	 Malzahn, E., Ciprianidis, S., Káldi, K., Schafmeier, T.  
& Brunner, M. Photoadaptation in Neurospora by 
competitive interaction of activating and inhibitory 
LOV domains. Cell 142, 762–772 (2010).
100.	Ruger-Herreros, C., Gil-Sanchez Mdel, M., Sancar, G., 
Brunner, M. & Corrochano, L. M. Alteration of 
light-dependent gene regulation by the absence of the 
RCO-1/RCM-1 repressor complex in the fungus 
Neurospora crassa. PLOS ONE 9, e95069 (2014).
101.	Schumacher, J., Simon, A., Cohrs, K. C., Viaud, M. & 
Tudzynski, P. The transcription factor BcLTF1 regulates 
virulence and light responses in the necrotrophic  
plant pathogen Botrytis cinerea. PLOS Genet. 10, 
e1004040 (2014).
102.	Corrochano, L. M. et al. Expansion of signal 
transduction pathways in fungi by extensive genome 
duplication. Curr. Biol. 26, 1577–1584 (2016).
103.	Idnurm, A. & Heitman, J. Light controls growth and 
development via a conserved pathway in the fungal 
kingdom. PLOS Biol. 3, 615–626 (2005).  
This study clones the blue-light photoreceptor in 
Phycomyces blakesleeanus more than 30 years 
after the isolation of the corresponding mutant.
104.	Schmoll, M., Franchi, L. & Kubicek, C. P. Envoy, a  
PAS/LOV domain protein of Hypocrea jecorina 
(anamorph Trichoderma reesei), modulates cellulase 
gene transcription in reponse to light. Eukaryot. Cell 
4, 1998–2007 (2005).
105.	Hedtke, M. et al. Light-dependent gene activation  
in Aspergillus nidulans is strictly dependent on 
phytochrome and involves the interplay of phytochrome 
and white collar-regulated histone H3 acetylation.  
Mol. Microbiol. 97, 733–745 (2015).
106.	Cervantes-Badillo, M. G., Muñoz-Centeno, T., 
Uresti-Rivera, E. E., Argüello-Astorga, G. R. & 
Casas-Flores, S. The Trichoderma atroviride 
photolyase-encoding gene is transcriptionally 
regulated by non-canonical light response elements. 
FEBS J. 280, 3697–3708 (2013).
107.	Olmedo, M., Ruger-Herreros, C., Luque, E. M. & 
Corrochano, L. M. A complex photoreceptor system 
mediates the regulation by light of the conidiation 
genes con-10 and con-6 in Neurospora crassa. Fungal 
Genet. Biol. 47, 352–363 (2010).
108.	Wang, Z. et al. Light sensing by opsins and fungal 
ecology: NOP-1 modulates entry into sexual 
reproduction in response to environmental cues.  
Mol. Ecol. 27, 216–232 (2017).
109.	García-Martínez, J., B., M., Avalos, J. & Termpitz, U. 
The CarO rhodopsin of the fungus Fusarium fujikuroi 
is a light-driven protein pump that retards spore 
germination. Sci. Rep. 5, 7798 (2015).  
This paper provides the first demonstration of fast 
proton-pumping activity of a fungal opsin.
110.	 Peñalva, M. A., Tilburn, J., Bignell, E. & Arst, H. N. J. 
Ambient pH gene regulation in fungi: making 
connections. Trends Microbiol. 16, 291–300 (2008).
111.	 Alkan, N. et al. Global aspects of pacC regulation of 
pathogenicity genes in Colletotrichum gloeosporioides 
as revealed by transcriptome analysis. Mol. Plant 
Microbe Interact. 26, 1345–1358 (2013).
112.	Avelar, G. M. et al. A rhodopsin-guanylyl cyclase gene 
fusion functions in visual perception in a fungus.  
Curr. Biol. 24, 1234–1240 (2014).
113.	Avelar, G. M. et al. A cyclic GMP-dependent K+ channel 
in the blastocladiomycete fungus Blastocladiella 
emersonii. Eukaryot. Cell 14, 958–963 (2015).
114.	Bhoo, S.-H., Davis, S. J., Walker, J., Karniol, B.  
& Vierstra, R. D. Bacteriophytochromes are 
photochromic histidine kinases using a biliverdin 
chromophore. Nature 414, 776–779 (2001).
115.	Nagatani, K. Plant biology. Lighting up the nucleus. 
Science 288, 821–822 (2000).
116.	Bayram, O. et al. VelB/VeA/LaeA complex coordinates 
light signal with fungal development and secondary 
metabolism. Science 320, 1504–1506 (2008).
117.	Bayram, Ö. & Braus, G. H. Coordination of secondary 
metabolism and development in fungi: the velvet 
family of regulatory proteins. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 
36, 1–24 (2012).
118.	Azuma, N. et al. In vitro analysis of His-Asp 
phosphorelays in Aspergillus nidulans: the first direct 
biochemical evidence for the existence of His-Asp 
phosphotransfer system in filamentous fungi. Biosci. 
Biotechnol. Biochem. 71, 2493–2502 (2007).
119.	Wang, Z. et al. The fast-evolving phy-2 gene modulates 
sexual development in response to light in the model 
fungus Neurospora crassa. mBio https://doi.org/ 
10.1128/mBio.02148-15 (2016).
120.	Fuller, K. K., Cramer, R. A., Zegans, M. E., Dunlap, J. C. 
& Loros, J. J. Aspergillus fumigatus photobiology 
illuminates the marked heterogeneity between 
isolates. mBio 7, e01517-16 (2016).
121.	Lukens, R. J. Reversal by red light of blue light inhibition 
of sporulation in Alternaria solani. Phytophathology 55, 
1032 (1965).
122.	Pruß, S. et al. Role of the Alternaria alternata 
blue-light receptor WC-1 (LreA) in spore formation and 
secondary metabolism. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 
2582–2591 (2014).
123.	García-Esquivel, M., Esquivel-Naranjo, E. U., 
Hernández-Oñate, M. A., Ibarra-Laclette, E. & 
Herrera-Estrella, A. The Trichoderma atroviride 
cryptochrome/photolyase genes regulate the 
expression of blr1-independent genes both in red  
and blue light. Fungal Biol. 120, 500–512 (2016).
124.	Verma, S. & Idnurm, A. The Uve1 endonuclease is 
regulated by the White Collar Complex to protect 
Cryptococcus neoformans from UV damage. 
PLOS Genet. 9, e1003769 (2013).
125.	Rangel, D. E. N., Fernandes, E. K. K., Braga, G. U. L. & 
Roberts, D. W. Visible light during mycelial growth and 
conidiation of Metarhizium robertsii produces conidia 
with increased stress tolerance. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 
315, 81–86 (2011).
126.	Hu, Y. et al. Disruption of a phytochrome-like  
histidine kinase gene by homologous recombination 
leads to a significant reduction in vegetative growth, 
sclerotia production, and the pathogenicity of Botrytis 
cinerea. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 85, 25–33 
(2014).
127.	Qiu, L., Wang, J. J., Chu, Z. J., Ying, S. H. & Feng, M. G. 
Phytochrome controls conidiation in response to  
red/far-red light and daylight length and regulates 
multistress tolerance in Beauveria bassiana. Environ. 
Microbiol. 16, 2316–2328 (2014).
128.	Hérivaux, A. et al. Major sensing proteins in 
pathogenic fungi: the hybrid histidine kinase family. 
PLOS Genet. 12, e1005683 (2016).
129.	de Castro, P. A. et al. ChIP-seq reveals a role for CrzA 
in the Aspergillus fumigatus high-osmolarity glycerol 
response (HOG) signalling pathway. Mol. Microbiol. 
94, 655–674 (2014).
130.	Takeshita, N. et al. Pulses of Ca2+ coordinate actin 
assembly and exocytosis for stepwise cell extension. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 5701–5706 (2017).
131.	Zhou, L. et al. Superresolution and pulse-chase 
imaging reveal the role of vesicle transport in  
polar growth of fungal cells. Sci. Adv. 4, e1701798 
(2018).
132.	Tisch, D., Kubicek, C. P. & Schmoll, M. New insights 
into the mechanism of light modulated signaling by 
heterotrimeric G-proteins: ENVOY acts on gna1 and 
gna3 and adjusts cAMP levels in Trichoderma reesei 
(Hypocrea jecorina). Fungal Genet. Biol. 48, 631–640 
(2011).
133.	Schmoll, M., Esquivel-Naranjo, E. U. & 
Herrera-Estrella, A. Trichoderma in the light of day — 
physiology and development. Fungal Genet. Biol. 47, 
909–916 (2010).
134.	Bodvard, K., Jörhov, A., Blomberg, A., Molin, M.  
& Käll, M. The yeast transcription factor Crz1 is 
activated by light in a Ca2+/calcineurin-dependent  
and PKA-independent manner. PLOS ONE 8, e53404 
(2013).
135.	Bodvard, K. et al. Light-sensing via hydrogen  
peroxide and a peroxiredoxin. Nat. Commun. 8, 
14791 (2017).
136.	Hao, N. & O’Shea, E. K. Signal-dependent dynamics  
of transcription factor translocation controls  
gene expression. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 19, 31–39 
(2011).
137.	Purschwitz, J., Müller, S. & Fischer, R. Mapping the 
interaction sites of Aspergillus nidulans phytochrome 
FphA with the global regulator VeA and the white 
collar protein LreB. Mol. Genet. Genomics. 281, 
35–42 (2009).
138.	Rauscher, S., Pacher, S., Hedtke, M., Kniemeyer, O. & 
Fischer, R. A phosphorylation code of the Aspergillus 
nidulans global regulator VelvetA (VeA) determines 
specific functions. Mol. Microbiol. 99, 909–924 
(2016).
139.	Smith, H. Light quality, photoperception, and plant 
strategy. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 33, 481–518 
(1982).
140.	Njimona, I., Yang, R. & Lamparter, T. Temperature 
effects on bacterial phytochrome. PLOS ONE 9, 
e109794 (2014).
141.	Legris, M. et al. Phytochrome B integrates light and 
temperature signals in Arabidopsis. Science 354, 
897–900 (2016).
142.	Jung, J. H. et al. Phytochromes function as 
thermosensors in Arabidopsis. Science 354,  
886–889 (2016).
143.	Casal, J. J. & Qüesta, J. I. Light and temperature cues: 
multitasking receptors and transcriptional integrators. 
New Phytol. 217, 1029–1034 (2018).
144.	Shen, W. L. et al. Function of rhodopsin in temperature 
discrimination in Drosophila. Science 331, 1333–1336 
(2011).
145.	Nakasone, Y., Ono, T.-A., Ishii, A., Masuda, S. & 
Terazima, M. Temperature-sensitive reaction of a 
photosensor protein YcgF: possibility of a role of 
temperature sensor. Biochemistry 49, 2288–2296 
(2010).
146.	Fujii, Y. et al. Phototropin perceives temperature 
based on the lifetime of its photoactivated state. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114, 9206–9211 (2017).
147.	Schafmeier, T. et al. Circadian activity and abundance 
rhythms of the Neurospora clock tanscription factor 
WCC associated with rapid nucleo-cytoplamic 
shuttling. Genes Dev. 22, 3397–3402 (2008).
148.	Hunt, S. M., Thompson, S., Elvin, M. & Heintzen, C. 
VIVID interacts with the WHITE COLLAR complex and 
FREQUENCY-interacting RNA helicase to alter light 
and clock responses in Neurospora. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 107, 16709–16714 (2010).
Acknowledgements
The work of the authors’ laboratory was supported by the 
German Science Foundation (DFG Fi 459/19-1) and the China 
Scholar Council (CSC). The authors thank A. Diernfellner 
(Heidelberg) and J. Schumacher (Münster) for Neurospora 
crassa strains and providing some images for Fig. 2.
Author contributions
Z.Y. and R.F. researched data for the article, made substantial 
contributions to discussions of the content, wrote the article 
and reviewed and/or edited the manuscript before 
submission.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Reviewer information
Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks A. Herrera-Estrella, 
J. Loros and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their 
contribution to the peer review of this work.
www.nature.com/nrmicro
Reviews
